Hey! Hey!
Now is the winter of ourdiscontent
made glorious summer bythis son of York.
And all the clouds thatlowered upon our house
in the deep bosom of theocean buried.
Now are our brows boundwith victorious wreaths,
our bruised arms hung upfor monuments,
our stern alarums changedto merry meetings,
our dreadful marches todelightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hathsmoothed his wrinkledfront,
and now, instead ofmounting barbed steeds
to fright the souls offearful adversaries,
he capers nimbly in alady's chamber
to the lascivious pleasingof a lute.
But I, that am not shapedfor sportive tricks
nor made to court anamorous looking glass;
I, that am rudely stamped
and want love's majesty tostrut before a wantonambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed ofthis fair proportion,
cheated of feature bydissembling nature,
deformed, unfinished,
sent before my time intothis breathing world
scarce half made up,
and that so lamely andunfashionable
that dogs bark at me as Ihalt by them--
why I, in this weak pipingtime of peace
have no delight to passaway the time,
unless to spy my shadow inthe sun
and descant on my owndeformity.
And therefore, since Icannot prove a lover
to entertain these fairwell-spoken days,
I am determined to prove avillain
and hate the idlepleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid,inductions dangerous,
by drunken prophecies,libels, and dreams,
to set my brother Clarenceand the king in deadly hate
the one against the other.
And if King Edward be astrue and just
as I am subtle, false, andtreacherous,
this day should Clarenceclosely be mewed up
about a prophecy whichsays
that G of Edward's heirsthe murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to mysoul.
Here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day.
What means this armed guardthat waits upon your grace?
His majesty, tendering myperson's safety,
hath appointed thisconduct to convey me tothe Tower.
Upon what cause?
Because my name is George.
Alack, my lord, that faultis none of yours.
He should for that commityour godfathers.
Oh, belike his majestyhath some intent
that you shall benew-christened in the Tower.
What's the matter,Clarence?
May I know?
Yea, Richard, when I know,
for I protest, as yet I donot.
But as I can learn, hehearkens after propheciesand dreams
and from the cross-rowplucks the letter G
and says a wizard told him
that by G his issuedisinherited should be.
And, for my name of Georgebegins with G,
it follows in his thoughtthat I am he.
These, as I learn, andsuch like toys as these
have moved his highness tocommit me now.
Why, this it is, when menare ruled by women.
'Tis not the king thatsends you to the Tower.
My Lady Grey, his wife,Clarence;
'tis she that tempers himto this extremity.
Was it not she and thatgood man of worship,
Anthony Woodville, herbrother there,
that made him send LordHastings to the Tower,
from whence this presentday he is delivered?
We are not safe, Clarence.
We are not safe.
By heaven, I think thereis no man secure
but the queen's kindredand night-walking heralds
that trudge betwixt theking and Mistress Shore.
Heard ye not what anhumble suppliant
Lord Hastings was to herfor his delivery?
Humbly complaining to herdeity
got my lord chamberlainhis liberty.
I'll tell you what.
I think it is our way,
if we will keep in favorwith the king,
to be her men and wear herlivery.
The jealous o'erworn widowand herself,
since that our brotherdubbed them gentlewomen,
are mighty gossips in ourmonarchy.
I beseech your graces bothto pardon me.
His majesty hath straitlygiven in charge
that no man shall haveprivate conference
of what degree soever withhis brother.
Even so, and it pleaseyour worship, Brakenbury,
you may partake ofanything we say.
We speak no treason, man.
We say the king is wiseand virtuous
and his noble queen wellstruck in years, fair, andnot jealous.
We say that Shore's wifehath a pretty foot, acherry lip,
a bonny eye, a passingpleasing tongue,
and that the queen's kindredare made gentle-folk.
Now how say you, sir?
Can you deny all this?
With this, my lord, myselfhave naught to do.
Naught with MistressShore?
I tell thee, fellow,
he that doth naught withher, excepting one,
were best to do itsecretly, alone.
What one, my lord?
Her husband, knave.Wouldst thou betray me?
I do beseech your grace topardon me
and withal forbear yourconference with the noble duke.
We know thy charge,Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the queen's objectsand must obey.
Brother, farewell.
I will unto the king.
And whatsoe'er you willemploy me in,
were it to call KingEdward's widow sister,
I will perform it toenfranchise you.
Meantime, this deepdisgrace in brotherhood
touches me deeper than youcan imagine.
I know it pleaseth neitherof us well.
Well, your imprisonmentshall not be long.
I will deliver you or elselie for you.
Meantime, have patience.
I must, perforce.
Farewell.
Go; tread the path thatthou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence.
I do love thee so
that I will shortly sendthy soul to heaven,
if heaven will take thepresent at our hands.
But who comes here?
The new-deliveredHastings.
Good time of day unto mygracious lord.
As much unto my good lordchamberlain.
Well are you welcome tothe open air.
How hath your lordshipbrooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord,as prisoners must.
But I shall live, my lord,to give them thanks
that were the cause of myimprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt, and soshall Clarence too,
for they that were yourenemies are his
and have prevailed as muchon him as you.
More pity that the eagleshould be mewed
while kites and buzzardsprey at liberty.
What news abroad?
No news so bad abroad asthis at home.
The king is sickly, weak,melancholy,
and his physicians fearhim mightily.
Now, by Saint John, thatnews is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evildiet long
and overmuch consumed hisroyal person.
'Tis very grievous to bethought upon.
Where is he, in his bed?
He is.
Go you before, and I willfollow you.
He cannot live, I hope,and must not die
till George be packed withpost-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge hishatred more to Clarence
with lies well steeledwith weighty arguments.
And if I fail not in mydeep intent,
Clarence hath not anotherday to live;
which done, God take KingEdward to his mercy
and leave the world for meto bustle in,
for then I'll marryWarwick's youngest daughter.
What though I killed herhusband and her father?
The readiest way to makethe wench amends
is to become her husbandand her father,
the which will I,
not all so much for loveas for another secretclose intent,
by marrying her which Imust reach unto.
But yet I run before myhorse to market.
Clarence still breathes.
Edward still lives andreigns.
When they are gone, thenmust I count my gain.
Set down, set down yourhonorable load,
if honor may be shroudedin a hearse,
whilst I awhileobsequiously lament
the untimely fall ofvirtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of aholy king,
pale ashes of the house ofLancaster,
thou bloodless remnant ofthat royal blood.
Be it lawful that Iinvocate thy ghost
to hear the lamentationsof poor Anne,
wife to thy Edward, to thyslaughtered son,
stabbed by the selfsame handthat made these wounds.
Lo, in these windows thatlet forth thy life,
I pour the helpless balmof my poor eyes.
O, cursed be the hand thatmade these holes,
cursed the heart that hadthe heart to do it,
cursed the blood that letthis blood from hence.
More direful hap betidethat hated wretch
that makes us wretched bythe death of thee
than I can wish to adders,spiders, toads,
or any creeping venomedthing that lives.
If ever he have child,abortive be it,
prodigious, and untimelybrought to light,
whose ugly and unnaturalaspect
may fright the hopefulmother at the view,
and that be heir to hisunhappiness.
If ever he have wife,
let her be made moremiserable by the death of him
than I am made by my younglord and thee.
Come now towards Chertseywith your holy load,
taken from Paul's to beinterred there.
Stay, you that bear thecorse, and set it down.
What black magicianconjures up this fiend
to stop devoted charitabledeeds?
Villains, set down thecorse, or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of himthat disobeys.
My lord, stand back, andlet the coffin pass.
Unmannered dog, standthou, when I command.
Advance thy halberd higherthan my breast,
or, by Saint Paul, I'llstrike thee to my foot
and spurn upon thee,beggar, for thy boldness!
What? Do you tremble?
Are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, foryou are mortal,
and mortal eyes cannotendure the devil.
Avaunt, thou dreadfulminister of hell.
Thou hadst but power overhis mortal body.
His soul thou canst nothave; therefore ,be gone.
Sweet saint, for charity,be not so curst.
Foul devil, for God's sake,hence, and trouble us not,
for thou hast made thehappy earth thy hell,
filled it with cursingcries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to viewthy heinous deeds,
behold this pattern of thybutcheries!
O, gentlemen, see, see!
Dead Henry's wounds opentheir congealed mouths
and bleed afresh!
Blush, blush, thou lump offoul deformity,
for 'tis thy presence thatexhales this blood
from cold and empty veinswhere no blood dwells.
Thy deed, inhuman andunnatural,
provokes this deluge mostunnatural.
O God, which this bloodmadest,
revenge his death!
O earth, which this blooddrinkest,
Either heaven with lightningstrike the murderer dead,
or earth, gape open wideand eat him quick,
as thou dost swallow upthis good king's blood,
which his hell-governedarm hath butchered!
Lady, you know no rules ofcharity,
which renders good forbad, blessings for curses.
Villain, thou knowest nolaw of God nor man.
No beast so fierce butknows some touch of pity.
But I know none andtherefore am no beast.
O wonderful, when devilsspeak the truth!
More wonderful when angelsare so angry.
Vouchsafe, divineperfection of a woman,
of these supposed crimesto give me leave
by circumstance but toacquit myself.
Vouchsafe, defusedinfection of a man,
of these known evils butto give me leave
by circumstance to accusethy cursed self!
Fairer than tongue canname thee.
Let me have some patientleisure to excuse myself.
Fouler than heart canthink thee.
Thou canst make no excusecurrent but to hang thyself!
By such despair, I shouldaccuse myself.
And by despairing shaltthou stand excused
for doing worthy vengeanceon thyself,
that didst unworthyslaughter upon others.
Say that I slew them not.
Then say they were notslain, but dead they are,
and, devilish slave, bythee.
I did not kill yourhusband.
Why, then he is alive.
Nay, he is dead, and slainby Edward's hand.
In thy foul throat, thouliest.
Queen Margaret saw thymurderous falchion smokingin his blood,
the which thou once didstspend against her breast,
but that thy brothers beataside the point.
I was provoked by herslanderous tongue
that laid their guilt uponmy guiltless shoulders.
Thou wast provoked by thybloody mind,
that never dreamt on aughtbut butcheries.
Didst thou not kill thisking?
I grant ye, aye.
Dost grant me, hedgehog?
Then God grant me too
thou mayest be damned forthat wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild,and virtuous!
The better for the King ofHeaven, that hath him.
He is in heaven, wherethou shalt never come.
Let him thank me that holpto send him thither,
for he was fitter for thatplace than earth.
And thou unfit for anyplace but hell.
Yes, one place else, ifyou will hear me name it.
Some dungeon.
Your bedchamber.
Ill rest betide thechamber where thou liest!
So will it, madam, till Ilie with you.
I hope so.
I know so.
But, gentle Lady Anne,
to leave this keenencounter of our wits
and fall something into aslower method,
is not the causer of thetimeless deaths
of these Plantagenets,Henry and Edward,
as blameful as theexecutioner?
Thou wast the cause andmost accursed effect.
Your beauty was the causeof that effect,
your beauty that did hauntme in my sleep
to undertake the death ofall the world
so I might live one hourin your sweet bosom.
If I thought that, I tellthee, homicide,
these nails should rendthat beauty from mycheeks.
These eyes could not endurethat beauty's wreck.
You should not blemish itif I stood by.
As all the world is cheered bythe sun, so I by that.
It is my day, my life.
Black night o'ershade thyday and death thy life!
Curse not thyself, faircreature; thou art both.
I would I were to berevenged on thee.
It is a quarrel mostunnatural
to be revenged on him thatloveth thee.
It is a quarrel just andreasonable
to be revenged on him thatkilled my husband.
He that bereft thee, lady,of thy husband
did it to help thee to abetter husband.
His better doth notbreathe upon the earth.
He lives that loves theebetter than he could.
Name him.
Plantagenet.
Why, that was he.
The selfsame name but oneof better nature.
Where is he?
Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?
Would it were mortalpoison, for thy sake.
Never came poison from sosweet a place.
Never hung poison on afouler toad.
Out of my sight! Thou dostinfect mine eyes.
Thine eyes, sweet lady,have infected mine.
Would they were basilisks,to strike thee dead!
I would they were, that Imight die at once,
for now they kill me witha living death.
Those eyes of thine frommine have drawn salt tears,
shamed their aspects withstore of childish drops.
These eyes, which nevershed remorseful tear,
no, when my father Yorkand Edward wept
to hear the piteous moanthat Rutland made
when black-faced Cliffordshook his sword at him
nor when thy warlikefather, like a child,
told the sad story of myfather's death
and twenty times madepause to sob and weep,
that all the standers-byhad wet their cheeks
like trees bedashed withrain.
In that sad time, my manlyeyes did scorn an humble tear,
and what these sorrowscould not thence exhale,
thy beauty hath,
and made them blind withweeping.
I never sued to friend norenemy.
My tongue could never learnsweet smoothing word.
But now thy beauty isproposed my fee,
my proud heart sues andprompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip suchscorn,
for it was made forkissing, lady,
not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heartcannot forgive,
lo, here I lend thee thissharp-pointed sword,
which if thou please tohide in this true breast
and lay the soul forththat adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to thedeadly stroke
and humbly beg the deathupon my knee.
Nay, do not pause, for Idid kill King Henry,
but 'twas thy beauty thatprovoked me.
Nay, now dispatch!
'Twas I that stabbed youngEdward,
but 'twas thy heavenlyface that set me on.
Take up the sword again,or take up me.
Arise, dissembler.
Though I wish thy death, Iwill not be thy executioner.
Then bid me kill myself,and I will do it.
I have already.
That was in thy rage.
Speak it again, and evenwith the word,
this hand, which for thylove did kill thy love,
shall for thy love kill afar truer love.
To both their deaths thoushalt be accessory.
I would I knew thy heart.
'Tis figured in my tongue.
I fear me both are false.
Then never was man true.
Well, well, put up yoursword.
Say, then, my peace ismade.
That thou shalt knowhereafter.
But shall I live in hope?
All men, I hope, live so.
Vouchsafe to wear thisring.
To take is not to give.
Look how my ringencompasseth thy finger.
Even so, thy breastencloseth my poor heart.
Wear both of them, forboth of them are thine.
And if thy poor, devotedservant
may but beg one favor atthy gracious hand,
thou dost confirm hishappiness forever.
What is it?
That it may please youleave these sad designs
to him that hath mostcause to be a mourner
and presently repair toCrosby Place,
where, after I havesolemnly interred
at Chertsey Monastery thisnoble king
and wet his grave with myrepentant tears,
I will with all expedientduty see you
for divers unknownreasons.
I beseech you, grant methis boon.
With all my heart, andmuch it joys me too,
to see you are become sopenitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, goalong with me.
Bid me farewell.
'Tis more than youdeserve.
But since you teach me howto flatter you,
imagine I have saidfarewell already.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Towards Chertsey, noblelord?
No, to Whitefriars; thereattend my coming.
Was ever woman in thishumor wooed?
Was ever woman in thishumor won?
I'll have her, but I willnot keep her long.
What?
I, that killed her husbandand his father,
to take her in her heart'sextremest hate,
curses in her mouth, tearsin her eyes,
the bleeding witness ofher hatred by;
having God, herconscience, and these barsagainst me,
and I, no friends to backmy suit at all
but the plain devil anddissembling looks,
and yet to win her, allthe world to nothing.
Hath she forgot already thatbrave prince, Edward, her lord,
whom I, some three monthssince,
stabbed in my angry moodat Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a loveliergentleman,
framed in the prodigalityof nature,
young, valiant, wise, and,no doubt, right royal,
the spacious world cannotagain afford.
And will she yet debaseher eyes on me,
that cropped the goldenprime of this sweet prince
and made her widow to awoeful bed?
On me, whose all notequals Edward's moiety?
On me, who halts and ammisshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarlydenier,
I do mistake my person allthis while.
Upon my life, she finds,although I cannot,
myself to be a marvelousproper man.
I'll be at charges for alooking glass
and entertain a score ortwo of tailors
to study fashion to adornmy body.
Since I am crept in favorwith myself,
I will maintain it at somelittle cost.
But first, I'll turn yonfellow in his grave
and then return, lamentingto my love.
Shine out, fair sun, tillI have bought a glass,
that I might see my shadowas I pass.
Have patience, sister.
There's no doubt
his majesty will soon recoverhis accustom'd health.
In that you brook it ill,it makes him worse.
Therefore, for God's sake,entertain good comfort,
and cheer his grace withquick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, whatwould betide of me?
No other harm but loss ofsuch a lord.
The loss of such a lordincludes all harms!
The heavens have blessedyou with a goodly son
to be your comforter whenhe is gone.
Ah, he is young, and hisminority is put
unto the trust of RichardGloucester,
a man who loves not me nornone of you.
Is it concluded he shallbe protector?
It is determined, notconcluded yet,
but so it must be, if theking miscarry.
Here come the lords ofBuckingham and Derby.
Good time of day unto yourroyal grace.
God make your majestyjoyful as you have been.
The Countess Richmond,good my lord of Derby,
to your good prayer wouldscarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstandingshe's your wife
and loves not me, be you,good lord, assured
I hate not you for herproud arrogance.
I do beseech you, eithernot believe
the envious slanders ofher false accusers,
or, if she be accused ontrue report,
bear with her weakness,
which, I think, proceedsfrom wayward sickness
and no grounded malice.
Saw you the king today, mylord of Derby?
But now the duke ofBuckingham and I
are come from visiting hismajesty.
What likelihood of hisamendment, lords?
Madam, good hope.
His grace speakscheerfully.
God grant him health.
Did you confer with him?
Aye, madam.
He desires to makeatonement
between the duke ofGloucester and your brothers
and between them and mylord chamberlain
and sent to warn them tohis royal presence.
Would all were well.
But that will never be.
I fear our happiness is atthe height.
They do me wrong, and Iwill not endure it.
Who is it that complainsunto the king
that I, forsooth, am sternand love them not?
By holy Paul, they lovehis grace but lightly
that fill his ears withsuch dissentious rumors.
Because I cannot flatterand look fair,
smile in men's faces,smooth, deceive, and cog,
duck with French nods andapish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorousenemy.
Cannot a plain man liveand think no harm,
but thus his simple truthmust be abused
with silken, sly,insinuating jacks?
To who in all this presencespeaks your grace?
To thee, that hast norhonesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee?
When done thee wrong?
Or thee? Or thee?
Or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all!
His royal grace,
whom God preserve betterthan you would wish,
cannot be quiet scarce abreathing-while
but you must trouble himwith lewd complaints.
Brother of Gloucester, youmistake the matter.
The king, on his own royaldisposition
and not provoked by anysuitor else,
aiming, belike, at yourinterior hatred
that in your outwardactions shows itself
against my children,brothers, and myself,
makes him to send,
that he may learn theground of your ill will
and thereby to remove it.
I cannot tell.
The world is grown so bad
that wrens make prey whereeagles dare not perch.
Since every jack became agentleman,
there's many agentleperson made a jack.
Come, come, we know yourmeaning, brother Gloucester.
You envy my advancementand my friends'.
God grant we never mayhave need of you!
Meantime, God grants thatwe have need of you.
Our brother is imprison'dby your means,
myself disgraced,
and the nobility held incontempt,
while great promotions aredaily given
to ennoble those thatscarce some two days since
were worth a noble.
By Him that raised me tothis careful height
from that contented hapwhich I enjoyed,
I never did incense hismajesty against the dukeof Clarence
but have been an earnestadvocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do meshameful injury
falsely to draw me inthese vile suspects.
You may deny that you werenot the mean
of my Lord Hastings' lateimprisonment.
She may, my lord, for--
She may, Lord Rivers.
Why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, thandenying that.
She may help you to manyfair preferments
and then deny her aidinghand therein
and lay those honors onyour high desert.
What may she not?
She may. Aye, marry, mayshe.
What, marry, may she?
Marry with a king, abachelor, and a handsomestripling too.
I wish your grandam had aworser match.
My lord of Gloucester, Ihave too long borne
your blunt upbraidings andyour bitter scoffs.
By Heaven, I will acquainthis majesty
of those gross taunts thatoft I have endured!
I had rather be a countryservant maid
than a great queen withthis condition
to be so baited, scorned,and stormed at.
Small joy have I in beingEngland's queen!
And lessened be thatsmall, God, I beseech Him.
Thy honor, state, and seatare due to me.
What!
Threat you me with tellingof the king?
Tell him, and spare not.
Look, what I have said,
I will avouch in presenceof the king.
I dare adventure to besent to the Tower.
'Tis time to speak; mypains are quite forgot.
Out, devil!
I remember them too well.
Thou kills't my husbandHenry in the Tower
and Edward, my poor son,at Tewksbury.
Ere you were queen, aye,or your husband king,
I was a packhorse in hisgreat affairs,
a weeder-out of his proudadversaries,
a liberal rewarder of hisfriends.
To royalize his blood, Ispent mine own.
Aye, and much better bloodthan his or thine.
Let me put in your minds,if you forget,
what you have been erethis and what you are;
withal, what I have beenand what I am.
A murderous villain, andso still thou art.
Poor Clarence did forsakehis father, Warwick.
Aye, and forswore himself,which, Jesu pardon--
Which God revenge.
To fight on Edward's partyfor the crown.
And for his meed, poorlord, he is mew'd up.
I would to God my heartwere flint like Edward's
or Edward's soft andpitiful like mine.
I am too childish-foolishfor this world.
My lord of Gloucester, inthose busy days
which here you urge toprove us enemies,
we followed then our lord,our sovereign king.
So should we you, if youshould be our king.
If I should be?
I'd rather be a peddler.
Far be it from my heart,the thought thereof.
As little joy, my lord, asyou suppose you should enjoy
were you this country'sking,
as little joy you maysuppose in me
that I enjoy being thequeen thereof.
Aye, little joy enjoys thequeen thereof,
for I am she andaltogether joyless.
I can no longer hold mepatient.
Hear me, you wranglingpirates, that fall out
in sharing that that youhave pilled from me.
Which of you trembles notthat looks on me
if not that I am queen,you bow like subjects,
yet that by you deposed,you quake like rebels?
Ah, gentle villain, do notturn away.
Foul wrinkled witch, whatmak'st thou in my sight?
But repetition of whatthou hast marred.
That will I make before Ilet thee go.
Wert thou not banished onpain of death?
I was, but I do find morepain in banishment
than death can yield mehere by my abode.
A husband and a son thouowest me.
And thou a kingdom.
All of you, allegiance.
This sorrow that I have byright is yours,
and all the pleasures youusurp are mine.
The curse my noble fatherlaid on thee
when thou didst crown hiswarlike brows with paper,
and with thy scorns drew'strivers from his eyes,
and then to dry themgavest the duke a clout
steeped in the faultlessblood of pretty Rutland--
His curses then frombitterness of souldenounced against thee
are all fallen upon thee.
And God, not we, haveplagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God to rightthe innocent.
O, 'twas the foulest deedto slay that babe
and the most mercilessthat e'er was heard of!
Tyrants themselves weptwhen it was reported.
No man but prophesiedrevenge for it.
Northumberland, thenpresent, wept to see it.
What?
Were you snarling allbefore I came,
ready to catch each otherby the throat
and turn you all yourhatred now on me?
Did York's dread curseprevail so much with Heaven
that Henry's death, mylovely Edward's death,
their kingdom's loss, mywoeful banishment
should all but answer forthat peevish brat?
Can curses pierce theclouds and enter Heaven?
Why, then, give way, dullclouds, to my quick curses!
Though not by war, bysurfeit die your king,
as ours by murder to makehim a king.
Edward, thy son, that nowis Prince of Wales,
for Edward, my son, thatwas Prince of Wales,
die in his youth by likeuntimely violence.
Thyself a queen, for methat was a queen,
outlive thy glory, like mywretched self.
Long mayest thou live towail thy children's death,
and see another, as I seethee now,
decked in thy rights asthou art stalled in mine.
Long die thy happy daysbefore thy death,
and after many lengthenedhours of grief,
die neither mother, wife,nor England's queen.
Rivers and Dorset, youwere standers by.
And so wast thou, LordHastings,
when my son was stabbedwith bloody daggers.
God, I pray him
that none of you may livehis natural age
but by some unlookedaccident cut off!
Have done thy charm, thouhateful, withered hag!
And leave out thee?
Stay, dog! For thou shalthear me.
If heaven have anygrievous plague in store
exceeding those that I canwish upon thee,
O, let them keep it tillthy sins be ripe,
and then hurl down theirindignation on thee,
the troubler of the poorworld's peace.
The worm of consciencestill begnaw thy soul.
Thy friends suspect fortraitors whilst thou lives
and take deep traitors forthy dearest friends.
No sleep close up thatdeadly eye of thine,
unless it be whilst sometormenting dream affrightsthee
with a hell of uglydevils.
O, thou elfish-marked,abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast sealed inthy nativity
the slave of nature andthe son of hell!
Ah, slander of thy heavymother's womb!
Thou loathed issue of thyfather's loins!
Thou rag of honor! Thoudetested--
Margaret!
Richard!
Huh?
I call thee not.
I cry thee mercy, then,for I did think
that thou hadst called meall these bitter names.
Why, so I did, but lookedfor no reply.
O, let me make the periodto my curse!
'Tis done by me and endsin Margaret.
Thus have you breathed yourcurse against yourself.
Poor painted queen, vainflourish of my fortune.
Why strew'st thou sugar onthat bottled spider,
whose deadly web ensnareththee about?
Fool, fool!
Thou whet'st a knife tokill thyself.
The day will come thatthou shalt wish for me
to help thee curse thispoisonous bunchbacked toad.
False-boding woman, endthy frantic curse,
lest to thy harm thou moveour patience.
Foul shame upon you!
You have all moved mine!
Were you well served, youwould be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you allshould do me duty.
Teach me to be your queenand you my subjects.
O, to serve me well, teachyourselves that duty.
Peace, please, for shameif not for charity.
Urge neither charity norshame to me!
Uncharitably with me haveyou dealt,
and shamefully my hopes byyou are butchered.
My charity is outrage;life, my shame.
And in that shame stilllive my sorrow's rage!
Have done, have done.
O princely Buckingham.
I kiss thy hand in sign ofleague and amity with thee.
Now fair befall thee andthy noble house.
Thy garments are notspotted with our blood,
nor thou within thecompass of my curse.
Nor no one here,
for curses never pass
the lips of those thatbreathe them in the air.
I will but think that theyascend the sky
and there awake God'sgentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed ofyonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, hebites.
And when he bites, hisvenom tooth will rankle tothe death.
Have naught to do withhim. Beware of him.
Sin, death, and hell haveset their marks on him,
and all their ministers,they attend on him.
What doth she say, my lordof Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, mygracious lord.
What?
Dost thou scorn me for mygentle counsel
and soothe the devil thatI warn thee from?
O, remember this anotherday,
when he shall split thyvery heart with sorrow,
and say poor Margaret wasa prophetess.
Live, each of you,
the subjects to his hate
and he to yours
and all of you to God's.
My hair doth stand on endto hear her curses.
And so doth mine.
I muse why she's atliberty.
I cannot blame her.
By God's holy mother, shehath had too much wrong,
and I repent my part thereofthat I have done to her.
I never did her any, to myknowledge.
Yet you have all thevantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to dosomebody good
that is too cold inthinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, heis well repaid.
He is franked up tofatting for his pains.
God pardon them that arethe cause thereof.
A virtuous and aChristian-like conclusion,
to pray for them that havedone scathe to us.
So do I ever, beingwell-advised,
for had I cursed now, I'dcurse myself.
Madam, his majesty dothcall for you
and for your grace andyou, my gracious lords.
Catesby, I come.
Lords, will you go withme?
We wait upon your grace.
I do the wrong and firstbegin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs thatI set abroach,
I lay unto the grievouscharge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed,have cast in darkness,
I do beweep to many simplegulls--
namely, to Derby,Hastings, Buckingham--
and tell them 'tis thequeen and her allies
that stir the king againstthe duke my brother.
Now they believe it andwithal whet me
to be revenged on Rivers,Dorset, Grey.
But then I sigh and with apiece of scripture,
tell them that God bids usdo good for evil,
and thus I clothe my nakedvillainy
with odd old ends stolenforth of holy writ
and seem a saint when mostI play the Devil.
But soft. Here come myexecutioners.
How now, my hardy, stout,resolved mates.
Are you now going todispatch this thing?
We are, my lord, and cometo have the warrant
that we may be admittedwhere he is.
Well thought upon; I haveit here about me.
When you have done, repairto Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in theexecution, withal obdurate.
Do not hear him plead,
for Clarence iswell-spoken
and perhaps may move yourhearts to pity
if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my lord.
We will not stand toprate.
Talkers are no good doers.
Be assured we go to use ourhands, not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstoneswhen fools' eyes fall tears.
I like you, lads.
About your business,straight.
Go, go; dispatch.
We will, my noble lord.
Why looks your grace soheavily today?
O, I have passed amiserable night...
so full of fearful dreamsand ugly sights
that, as I am a Christianfaithful man,
I would not spend anothersuch a night
though 'twere to buy aworld of happy days,
so full of dismal terrorwas the time.
What was your dream, mylord?
I pray you, tell it.
Methought that I hadbroken from the Tower
and was embark'd to crossto Burgundy.
And in my company, mybrother Gloucester,
who from my cabin tempted meto walk upon the hatches.
Thence we looked towardEngland
and cited up a thousandheavy times
during the wars of Yorkand Lancaster
that had befallen us.
As we paced along upon thegiddy footing of the hatches,
methought that Gloucesterstumbled
and in falling, struck me,that thought to stay him,
overboard into the tumblingbillows of the main.
"O Lord," methought, "whatpain it was to drown."
What dreadful noise ofwaters in my ears.
What sights of ugly deathwithin my eyes.
Methought I saw a thousandfearful wrecks,
ten thousand men thatfishes gnawed upon,
wedges of gold, greatanchors, heaps of pearl,
inestimable stones,unvalued jewels,
all scattered in thebottom of the sea.
Some lay in dead men'sskulls.
And in the holes whereeyes did once inhabit,
there were crept, as'twere, in scorn of eyes,
reflecting gems that wooedthe slimy bottom of the deep
and mocked the dead bonesthat lay scattered by.
Had you such leisure inthe time of death
to gaze upon these secretsof the deep?
Methought I had,
and often did I strive toyield the ghost,
but still the enviousflood stopped in my soul
and would not let it forth
to find the empty, vast,and wandering air
but smothered it within mypanting bulk,
which almost burst tobelch it in the sea.
Awaked you not in thissore agony?
No, no, my dream waslengthened after life.
O, then began the tempestto my soul.
I passed, methought, themelancholy flood
with that sour ferrymanwhich poets write of
unto the kingdom ofperpetual night.
The first that there didgreet my stranger soul
was my great father-in-law,renowned Warwick,
who spake aloud, "Whatscourge for perjury
can this dark monarchyafford false Clarence?"
And so he vanished.
Then came wandering by ashadow like an angel
with bright hair dabbledin blood,
and he shrieked out aloud,
"Clarence is come,
"false, fleeting, perjuredClarence,
"that stabbed me in thefield by Tewksbury.
Seize on him, Furies. Takehim unto torment!"
With that, methought,
a legion of foul fiendsenvironed me
and howled in mine earssuch hideous cries
that with the very noise,I trembling waked,
and for a season aftercould not believe but thatI was in hell,
such terrible impressionmade my dream.
No marvel, lord, though itaffrighted you.
I am afraid, methinks, tohear you tell it.
Keeper, keeper, I havedone these things
that now give evidenceagainst my soul, forEdward's sake.
And see how he requitesme!
O God!
If my deep prayers cannotappease thee,
but thou wilt be avengedon my misdeeds,
yet execute thy wrath inme alone.
O, spare my guiltless wifeand my poor children.
Keeper, I prithee, sit byme awhile.
My soul is heavy, and Ifain would sleep.
I will, my lord.
God give your grace goodrest.
Sorrow breaks seasons andreposing hours,
makes the night morningand the noontide night.
Princes have but theirtitles for their glories,
an outward honor for aninward toil.
And for unfeltimaginations,
they often feel a world ofrestless cares,
so that between theirtitles and low name,
there's nothing differsbut the outward fame.
How?
Who's here?
What wouldst thou, fellow?
How cam'st thou hither?
I would speak withClarence,
and I came hither on melegs.
What?
So brief?
'Tis better, sir, than tobe tedious.
Let him see our commission,and talk no more.
I am in this commanded todeliver
the noble duke of Clarenceto your hands.
I will not reason what ismeant hereby
because I will be guiltlessfrom the meaning.
There lies the dukeasleep.
There are the keys.
I'll to the king andsignify to him
that thus I have resignedto you my charge.
You may, sir.
'Tis a point of wisdom.
Fare you well?
What? Shall I stab him ashe sleeps?
No.
For he'll say 'twas donecowardly when he wakes.
Why, he shall never wakeuntil the great judgment day.
Why, then he'll say westabbed him sleeping.
The urging of that word"judgment"
hath bred a kind ofremorse in me.
What? Art thou afraid?
Not to kill him, having awarrant,
but to be damned forkilling him,
from the which no warrantcan defend me.
I thought thou hadst beenresolute.
So I am, to let him live.
I'll back to the duke ofGloucester and tell him so.
Hey, I pray thee, stay alittle.
I hope this passionatehumor of mine will change.
It was wont to hold me butwhile one tells twenty.
One, two, three, four,five, six, seven, eight,nine, ten,
eleven, twelve, thirteen,fourteen, fifteen,
sixteen, seventeen,eighteen,
nineteen, twenty.
How dost thou feel thyselfnow?
Some certain dregs ofconscience are yet within me.
Remember our reward whenthe deed's done.
Zounds, he dies!
I had forgot the reward.
Where is thy consciencenow?
O, in the duke ofGloucester's purse.
When he opens his purse togive us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.
'Tis no matter. Let it go.
There's few or none willentertain it.
Or if it come to theeagain?
I'll not meddle with it.
It makes a man a coward.
A man cannot steal but itaccuseth him.
A man cannot swear but itchecks him.
A man cannot lie with hisneighbor's wife
but it detects him.
'Tis a blushing,shamefaced spirit
that mutinies in a man'sbosom.
It fills a man full ofobstacles.
It made me once restore apurse of gold
that by chance I found.
It beggars any man thatkeeps it.
It is turned out of townsand cities
for a dangerous thing,
and every man that meansto live well
endeavors to trust tohimself and live without it.
'Zounds.
'Tis is even now at myelbow,
persuading me not to killthe duke.
Take the devil in thymind, and believe him not.
He would insinuate withthee but to make thee sigh.
Tut, I am strong-framed.
He cannot prevail with me.
Spoke like a tall man thatrespects our reputation.
Come, shall we fall towork?
Take him on the costardwith the hilts of thy sword
and then throw him in themalmsey-butt in the next room.
O excellent devise!
And make a sop of him.
Hark.
He wakes.
Strike now?
We'll reason with him.
Where art thou, keeper?
Give me a cup of wine.
You shall have wineenough, my lord, anon.
In God's name, what artthou?
A man, as you are.
But not, as I am, royal.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
Thy voice is thunder, butthy looks are humble.
My voice is now theking's, my looks mine own.
How darkly and how deadlydost thou speak.
Your eyes do menace me.
Why look you pale?
Who sent you hither?
Wherefore do you come?
To--
To murder me?
Aye. Aye.
You scarcely have thehearts to tell me so
and therefore cannot havethe hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, haveI offended you?
Offended us you have notbut the king.
I shall be reconciled tohim again.
Never, my lord. Therefore,prepare to die.
Are you drawn forth amonga world of men
to slay the innocent?
What is my offense?
Where is the evidence thatdoth accuse me?
What lawful quest havegiven their verdict up
unto the frowning judge?
Or who pronounced thebitter sentence
of poor Clarence death?
Before I be convict bycourse of law,
to threaten me with deathis most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hopeto have redemption
by Christ's dear blood shedfor our grievous sins,
that you depart and lay nohands on me.
The deed you undertake isdamnable.
What we will do, we doupon command.
And he that hath commandedis our king.
Erroneous vassals!
The great King of kings hathin the table of his law
commanded that thou shaltdo no murder.
Will you then spurn at hisedict and fulfill a man's?
Take heed, for he holdsvengeance in his hand
to hurl upon their headsthat break his law.
And that same vengeancedoth he hurl on thee
for false forswearing andfor murder too.
Thou didst receive thesacrament
to fight in quarrel of thehouse of Lancaster.
And like a traitor to thename of God
didst break that vow
and with thy treacherousblade
unrip'dst the bowels ofthy sovereign's son.
Whom thou was sworn tocherish and defend.
How can thou urge God'sdreadful law to us,
when thou hast broke it insuch dear degree?
Alas, for whose sake did Ithat ill deed?
For Edward, for mybrother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murderme for this,
for in that sin, he is asdeep as I.
If God will be avenged forthe deed,
O, know you yet, he doesit publicly.
Take not the quarrel fromhis powerful arm.
He needs no indirect orlawless course
to cut off those that haveoffended him.
Who made thee, then, abloody minister
when gallant-springingbrave Plantagenet,
that princely novice, wasstruck dead by thee?
My brother's love, thedevil, and my rage.
Thy brother's love, ourduty, and thy fault
provoke us hither now toslaughter thee.
Oh, if you love mybrother, hate not me.
I am his brother, and Ilove him well.
If you are hired for meed,go back again,
and I will send you to mybrother Gloucester,
who shall reward youbetter for my life
than Edward will fortidings of my death.
You are deceived.
Your brother Gloucesterhates you.
O, no, he loves me, and heholds me dear.
Go you to him from me.
Aye, so we will.
Tell him when that ourprincely father York
blessed his three sonswith his victorious arm
and charged us from hissoul to love each other,
he little thought of thisdivided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think ofthis, and he will weep.
Ah, millstones, as helessoned us to weep.
O, do not slander him, forhe is kind!
Right, as snow in harvest.
Come, you deceiveyourself.
'Tis he that sends us todestroy you here.
It cannot be,
for he bewept my fortune
and hugged me in his armsand swore with sobs
that he would labor mydelivery.
Why, so he doth,
when he delivers you fromthis earth's thralldom
to the joys of Heaven.
Make peace with God, foryou must die, my lord.
Have you that holy feelingin your souls
to counsel me to make mypeace with God,
and are you yet to yourown soul so blind
that you will war with Godby murdering me?
Oh, sirs, consider.
They that set you on to dothis deed
will hate you for thedeed.
What shall we do?
Relent, and save yoursouls.
Relent.
No, 'tis cowardly andwomanish.
Not to relent is beastly,savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you werea prince's son
being pent from liberty asI am now,
if two such murderers asyourselves came to you
would not entreat forlife?
Ah, you would beg, wereyou in my distress.
My friend, I spy some pityin thy looks.
O, if thine eye be not aflatterer,
come thou on my side andentreat for me.
A begging prince, whatbeggar pities not?
Look behind you, my lord!
Take that.
And that.
And if all this will notdo,
I'll drown you in themalmsey-butt within.
A bloody deed, anddesperately dispatched.
How fain, like Pilate,would I wash my hands
of this most grievousmurder.
How now.
What mean'st thou, thatthou helped me not?
The duke shall know howslack you have been.
I would he knew that I hadsaved his brother.
Take thou the fee, andtell him what I say,
for I repent me that theduke is slain!
Go, coward, as thou art!
Well.
I'll go hide the body insome hole
till that the duke giveorder for his burial.
And when I have my meed, Iwill away,
for this will out, andthen I must not stay.
Amen.
Why so, now have I done agood day's work.
You peers, continue thisunited league.
I every day expect anembassage from my Redeemer
to redeem me hence,
and now in peace my soulshall part to Heaven,
since I have made myfriends at peace on Earth.
Rivers and Hastings, takeeach other's hand.
Dissemble not your hatred.
Swear your love.
By heaven, my soul ispurged from grudging hate,
and with my hand, I sealmy true heart's love.
So thrive I, as I trulyswear the like.
Take heed you dally notbefore your king,
lest he that is thesupreme King of kings
confound your hiddenfalsehood
and award either of you tobe the other's end.
So prosper I as I swearperfect love.
And I, as I love Hastingswith my heart.
Yourself, madam, is notexempt from this.
Nor you, son Dorset;
Buckingham, nor you.
You have been factious,one against the other.
Wife, love Lord Hastings.
Let him kiss your hand.
And what you do, do itunfeignedly.
There, Hastings.
I will never more rememberour former hatred,
so thrive I and mine.
Dorset, embrace him.
Hastings, love lordmarquess.
This interchange of love,I here protest,
upon my part shall beinviolable.
And so swear I.
Now princely Buckingham.
Seal thou this league
with thy embracements tomy wife's allies,
and make me happy in yourunity.
Whenever Buckingham dothturn his hate on your grace,
but with all duteous lovedoth cherish you and yours,
God punish me with hate inthose where I expect mostlove.
When I have most need toemploy a friend,
and most assured that heis a friend,
deep, hollow, treacherous,or full of guile,
be he unto me!
This do I beg of God
when I am cold in love toyou or yours.
A pleasing cordial,princely Buckingham,
is this thy vow unto mysickly heart.
O! There wanteth now ourbrother Gloucester here
to make the blessed periodof this peace.
And in good time,
here come Sir RichardRatcliffe and the duke.
Good morrow to mysovereign king and queen.
And, princely peers, ahappy time of day.
Happy indeed, as we havespent the day.
Gloucester,
we have done deeds ofcharity,
made peace of enmity, fairlove of hate
between these swellingwrong-incensed peers.
A blessed labor, my mostsovereign lord.
Among this princely heap,
if any here by falseintelligence or wrong surmise
hold me a foe,
if I unwittingly or in myrage
have aught committed thatis hardly borne
by any in this presence,
I desire to reconcile meto his friendly peace.
'Tis death to me to be atenmity.
I hate it and desire allgood men's love.
First, madam, I entreattrue peace of you,
which I will purchase withmy duteous service.
Of you, my noble cousinBuckingham,
if ever any grudge werelodged between us;
of you, Lord Rivers, and,Lord Grey, of you,
that all without deserthave frowned on me;
dukes, earls, lords,gentlemen, indeed, of all;
I do not know thatEnglishman alive
with whom my soul is anyjot at odds
more than the infant thatis born tonight.
I thank my God for myhumility.
A holy day shall this bekept hereafter.
I would to God all strifeswere well compounded.
My sovereign lord, I dobeseech your highness
to take our brotherClarence to your grace.
Why, madam, have I offeredlove for this,
to be so flouted in thisroyal presence?
Who knows not that thegentle duke is dead?
You do him injury to scornhis corse.
Who knows not he is dead?
Who knows he is?
All-seeing Heaven, what aworld is this?
Look I so pale, LordDorset, as the rest?
Ay, my good lord.
And no man in the presence
but his red color hathforsook his cheeks.
Is Clarence dead?
The order was reversed!
But he, poor man, by yourfirst order died,
and that a winged Mercurydid bear.
Some tardy cripple borethe countermand
that came too lag to seehim buried.
God grant that some lessnoble and less loyal,
nearer in bloody thoughtsbut not in blood,
deserve not worse thanwretched Clarence did
and yet go current fromsuspicion.
A boon, my sovereign, formy service done.
I pray thee, peace.
My soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise unlessyour highness hear me.
Then say at once what isit thou demand'st.
The forfeit, sovereign, ofmy servant's life,
who slew today a righteousgentleman
lately attendant on theDuke of Norfolk.
Have I a tongue to doom mybrother's death,
and shall that tongue givepardon to a slave?
My brother killed no man.
His fault was thought,
yet his punishment wasbitter death.
Who sued to me for him?
Who in my wrath kneeled atmy feet
and bade me be advised?
Who spoke of brotherhood?
Who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poorsoul did forsake themighty Warwick
and did fight for me?
Who told me in the fieldat Tewksbury
when Oxford had me down,he rescued me and said,
"Dear brother, live, andbe a king"?
Who told me, when we bothlay in the field,
frozen almost to death,
how he did lap me even inhis garments
and did give himself, allthin and naked,
to the numb cold night?
All this from myremembrance brutish wrathsinfully pluck'd,
and not a man of you hadso much grace to put it inmy mind!
Oh, but when your cartersor your waiting vassals
have done a drunkenslaughter,
you straight are on yourknees for pardon, pardon!
And I, unjustly too, mustgrant it you.
But for my brother, not aman would speak,
nor I, ungracious, speak untomyself for him, poor soul.
The proudest of you all
have been beholding to himin his life,
yet none of you would oncebeg for his life!
O God, I fear thy justicewill take hold
on me and you and mine andyours for this!
Come, Hastings.
Help me to my closet.
Oh, poor Clarence.
This is the fruits ofrashness.
Marked you not how that theguilty kindred of the queen
looked pale when they didhear of Clarence death?
O, they did urge it stillunto the king.
God will revenge it.
Come, lords, will you go tocomfort Edward with ourcompany?
We wait upon your grace.
Good grandam, tell us, isour father dead?
No, boy.
Why do you weep so oft andbeat your breast
and cry, "O Clarence, myunhappy son"?
Why do you look on us andshake your head
and call us orphans,wretches, castaways
if that our noble fatherwere alive?
My pretty cousins, youmistake me both.
I do lament the sicknessof the king,
as loath to lose him, notyour father's death.
It were lost sorrow towail one that's lost.
Then you conclude, mygrandam.
He is dead.
The king, mine uncle, isto blame for it.
God will revenge it,
whom I will importune withearnest prayers
all to that effect.
And so will I!
Peace, children, peace.
The king doth love youwell.
Incapable and shallowinnocents,
you cannot guess who causedyour father's death.
Grandam, we can,
for my good uncleGloucester told me
the king, provoked to itby the queen,
devised impeachments toimprison him.
And when my uncle told meso,
he wept and pitied me,
kindly kissed my cheek,
bade me rely on him as onmy father,
and he would love medearly as a child.
Oh, that deceit shouldsteal such gentle shape
and with a virtuous vizardhide deep vice!
He is my son, aye, andherein my shame,
yet from my dugs he drewnot this deceit.
Think you my uncle diddissemble, grandam?
Aye, boy.
I cannot think it.
Hark! What noise is this?
Oh, who shall hinder me towail and weep,
to chide my fortune andtorment myself?
I'll join with blackdespair against my soul
and to myself become anenemy.
What means this scene ofrude impatience?
To make an act of tragicviolence.
Edward, my lord, thy son,our king, is dead!
Why grow the branches whenthe root is gone?
Why wither not the leavesthat want their sap?
If you will live, lament;if die, be brief,
that our swift-wingedsouls may catch the king's
or like obedient subjects,
follow him to his new kingdomof ne'er-changing night.
Ah, so much interest haveI in thy sorrow
as I had title in thynoble husband.
I have bewept a worthyhusband's death
and lived with looking onhis images.
But now two mirrors of hisprincely semblance
are cracked in pieces bymalignant death,
and I for comfort have butone false glass
that grieves me when I seemy shame in him.
Thou art a widow, yet thouart a mother
and hast the comfort ofthy children left.
But death hath snatched myhusband from mine arms
and plucked two crutchesfrom my feeble hands,
Clarence and Edward.
O, what cause have I,
thine being but a moietyof my moan,
to overgo thy woes anddrown thy cries!
Ah, aunt, you wept not forour father's death.
How can we aid you withour kindred tears?
Our fatherless distresswas left unmoaned.
Your widow dolor likewisebe unwept!
Give me no help inlamentation.
I am not barren to bringforth complaints.
All springs reduce theircurrents to mine eyes,
that I, being governed bythe watery moon,
may send forth plenteoustears to drown the world!
Oh for my husband, for mydear lord Edward!
Oh, for our father, forour dear lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine,Edward and Clarence.
What stay had I butEdward?
And he's gone.
What stay had we butClarence?
What stays had I but they?
And they are gone.
Was never widow had sodear a loss!
Were never orphans had sodear a loss.
Was never mother had sodear a loss.
Alas, I am the mother ofthese griefs.
Their woes are parceled.
Mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps,and so do I.
I for a Clarence weep.
So doth not she.
These babes for Clarenceweep, and so do I.
I for an Edward weep.
So do not they.
Alas, you three, on me,
threefold distressed, pourall your tears.
I am your sorrow's nurse,
and I will pamper it withlamentation.
Comfort, dear mother.
God is much displeased
that you take withunthankfulness his doing.
In common worldly things,'tis called ungrateful
with dull unwillingness torepay a debt
which with a bounteoushand was kindly lent,
much more to be thusopposite with Heaven,
for it requires the royaldebt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you, like acareful mother,
of the young prince, yourson.
Send straight for him. Lethim be crowned.
In him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow indead Edward's grave
and plant your joys inliving Edward's throne.
Sister, have comfort.
All of us have cause towail the dimming of ourshining star,
but none can help ourharms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cryyou mercy.
I did not see your grace.
Humbly on my knee, I craveyour blessing.
God bless thee and putmeekness in thy rest,
love, charity, obedience,and true duty.
Amen.
And make me die a good oldman.
That is the butt-end of amother's blessing.
I marvel that her gracedid leave it out.
You cloudy princes andheart-sorrowing peers
that bear this heavymutual load of moan,
now cheer each other ineach other's love.
Though we have spent ourharvest of this king,
we are to reap the harvestof his son.
The broken rancor of yourhigh-swollen hate,
but lately splintered,knit, and joined together,
must gently be preserved,cherished, and kept.
Me seemeth good that withsome little train,
forthwith from Ludlow theyoung prince be fetch'd
hither to London to becrowned our king.
Why with some little train,my lord of Buckingham?
Marry, my lord, lest by amultitude,
the new-healed wound ofmalice should break out,
which would be so much themore dangerous
by how much the estate isgreen and yet ungoverned,
where every horse bearshis commanding rein
and may direct his courseas please himself,
as well the fear of harm,
as harm apparent, in myopinion, ought to beprevented.
I hope the king made peacewith all of us,
and the compact is firmand true in me.
And so in me.
And so, I think, in all.
Yet, since it is butgreen,
it should be put to noapparent likelihood of breach
which haply by muchcompany might be urged.
Therefore, I say withnoble Buckingham
that it is meet so fewshould fetch the prince.
And so say I.
Then be it so.
And go we to determine whothey shall be
that straight shall postto Ludlow.
Madam, and you, my sister,
will you go to give yourcensures in this business?
With all our hearts.
Now, my lord, whoeverjourneys to the prince,
for God's sake, let not ustwo stay at home,
for by the way, I'll sortoccasion
as index to the story welate talked of,
to part the queen's proudkindred from the prince.
My other self, mycounsel's consistory,
my oracle, my prophet.
My dear cousin, I, as a child,will go by thy direction.
Toward Ludlow then, forwe'll not stay behind.
Good morrow, neighbor.
Whither away so fast?
I promise you, I scarcelyknow myself.
Hear you the news abroad?
Yes, that the king isdead.
Oh, ill news, by our lady.
Seldom comes the better.
I fear, I fear 'twillprove a giddy world.
Neighbors, God speed.
Give you good morrow, sir.
Doth the news hold of goodKing Edward's death?
Aye, sir, it is too true;God help the while.
Then, masters, look to seea troublous world.
No, no; by God's goodgrace, his son shall reign.
Woe to that land that'sgoverned by a child.
In him there is a hope ofgovernment,
which, in his nonagecouncil under him,
and in his full and ripenedyears, himself, no doubt,
shall then and till thengovern well.
So stood the state whenHenry the Sixth
was crowned in Paris butat nine months old.
Stood the state so?
No, no, good friends, Godwot.
For then this land wasfamously enriched
with politic gravecounsel.
Then the king had virtuousuncles to protect his grace.
Why, so hath this, both byhis father and mother.
Better it were they allcame by the father
or by his father therewere none at all,
for emulation, who shallnow be nearest,
will touch us all toonear, if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is theduke of Gloucester
and the queen's sons andbrothers haught and proud.
And were they to be ruledand not to rule,
This sickly land mightsolace as before.
Come, come. We fear theworst.
All will be well.
When clouds are seen, wisemen put on their cloaks.
When great leaves fall,then winter is at hand.
When the sun sets, whodoth not look for night?
Untimely storms makes menexpect a dearth.
All may be well, but ifGod sort it so,
'tis more than we deserveor I expect.
Truly, the hearts of menare full of fear.
You cannot reason almostwith a man
that looks not heavily andfull of dread.
Before the days of change,still is it so.
By a divine instinct,
men's minds mistrustensuing danger.
As by proof, we see thewaters swell before aboisterous storm.
But leave it all to God.
Whither away?
Marry, I was sent for tothe justices.
Yes, so was I.
I'll bear you company.
Last night, I hear, theylay at Stony-Stratford,
and at Northampton, theydo rest tonight.
Tomorrow or next day, theywill be here.
I long with all my heartto see the prince.
I hope he is much grownsince last I saw him.
But I hear no.
They say my son of York
hath almost overta'en himin his growth.
Aye, Mother, but I wouldnot have it so.
Why, my good cousin, it isgood to grow.
Grandam, one night, as wedid sit at supper,
my uncle Rivers talked howI did grow more than mybrother.
"Aye," quoth my uncleGloucester,
"Small herbs have grace;great weeds do grow apace."
And since, methinks, Iwould not grow so fast,
because sweet flowers areslow and weeds make haste.
Good faith, good faith,the saying did not hold
in him that did object thesame to thee.
He was the wretchedestthing when he was young,
so long a-growing and soleisurely,
that if this rule were true,he should be gracious.
And so, no doubt, he is,my gracious madam.
I hope he is, but yet letmothers doubt.
Now, by my troth, if I hadbeen remembered,
I could have given myuncle's grace a flout,
to touch his growth nearerthan he touched mine.
How, my young York?
I pray thee, let me hearit.
Marry, they say my unclegrew so fast
that he could gnaw a crustat two hours old.
'Twas full two years ere Icould get a tooth.
Grandam, this would havebeen a biting jest.
I pray thee, pretty York,who told thee this?
Grandam, his nurse.
His nurse?
Why, she was dead ere thouwas born.
If 'twere not she, Icannot tell who told me.
Parlous boy, go to. Youare too shrewd!
Good madam, be not angrywith the child.
Pitchers have ears.
Here is a messenger.
What news?
Such news, my lord, asgrieves me to report.
How doth the prince?
Well, madam, and inhealth.
What is thy news?
Lord Rivers and Lord Greyare sent to Pomfret,
and with them Sir ThomasVaughan, prisoners.
Who hath committed them?
The mighty dukesGloucester and Buckingham.
For what offense?
The sum of all I can, Ihave disclosed.
Why or for what the nobleswere committed
is all unknown to me, mygracious lord.
Ay, me.
I see the ruin of myhouse.
The tiger now hath seizedthe gentle hind.
Insulting tyranny beginsto jot
upon the innocent andaweless throne.
Welcome, destruction,blood, and massacre.
I see as in a map the endof all.
Accursed and unquietwrangling days,
how many of you have mineeyes beheld.
My husband lost his lifeto get the crown.
And often, up and down, mysons were tossed,
for me to joy and weeptheir gain and loss.
And being seated anddomestic broils cleanover-blown,
themselves, theconquerors, make war uponthemselves,
brother to brother, bloodto blood,
self against self.
O, preposterous andfrantic outrage,
end thy damned spleen,
or let me die, to look onearth no more.
Come, come, my boy; wewill to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.
Stay. I will go with you.
You have no cause.
My gracious lady, go,
and thither bear yourtreasure and your goods.
For my part,
I'll resign unto yourgrace the seal I keep.
and so betide to me
as well I tender you andall of yours.
Go.
I'll conduct you to thesanctuary.
Welcome, sweet prince, toLondon, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear cousin, mythoughts' sovereign.
The weary way hath madeyou melancholy.
No, Uncle, but our crosseson the way
have made it tedious,wearisome, and heavy.
I want more uncles here towelcome me.
Sweet prince, the untaintedvirtue of your years
hath not yet dived intothe world's deceit.
Nor more can youdistinguish of a man thanof his outward show,
which God, he knows,
seldom or never jumpethwith the heart.
Those uncles which youwant were dangerous.
Your grace attended totheir sugared words
but looked not on thepoison of their hearts.
God keep you from them andfrom such false friends.
God keep me from falsefriends.
But they were none.
My lord, the mayor ofLondon comes to greet you.
God bless your grace withhealth and happy days.
I thank you, good my lord,and thank you all.
I thought my mother and mybrother York
would long ere this havemet us on the way.
Fie, what a slug isHastings, that he comesnot to tell us
whether they will come orno.
And in good time, herecomes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord.
What, will our mothercome?
On what occasion, God heknows, not I,
the queen your mother andyour brother York
have taken sanctuary.
The tender prince wouldfain have come with me
to meet your grace
but by his mother wasperforce withheld.
Fie, what an indirect andpeevish course
is this of hers.
Lord cardinal, will yourgrace persuade the queen
to send the Duke of York
unto his princely brotherpresently?
If she deny, LordHastings, go with him
and from her jealous armspluck him perforce.
My lord of Buckingham, ifmy weak oratory
can from his mother winthe Duke of York,
anon expect him here.
But if she be obdurate tomild entreaties,
God in Heaven forbid
we should infringe the holyprivilege of blessedsanctuary.
Not for all this landwould I be guilty of sodeep a sin.
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
too ceremonious andtraditional.
Weigh it but with thegrossness of this age.
You break not sanctuary inseizing him.
The benefit thereof isalways granted
to those whose dealingshave deserved the place
and those who have the witto claim the place.
This prince hath neitherclaimed it nor deserved it
and therefore, in mineopinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him fromthence that is not there,
you break no privilege norcharter there.
Oft have I heard ofsanctuary men,
but sanctuary children...
Never till now.
My lord, you shallo'errule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings;will you go with me?
I go, my lord.
Good lords...
Make all the speedy hasteyou may.
Say, Uncle Gloucester...
If our brother come,
where shall we sojourntill our coronation?
Where it seems best untoyour royal self.
If I may counsel you, someday or two,
your highness shall reposeyou at the Tower,
then where you please andshall be thought most fit
for your best health andrecreation.
I do not like the tower ofany place.
Did Julius Caesar buildthat place, my lord?
He did, my gracious lord,begin that place,
which since succeedingages have re-edified.
Is it upon record or elsereported successively
from age to age, he builtit?
Upon record, my graciouslord.
But say, my lord, it werenot registered,
methinks the truth shouldlive from age to age,
as 'twere retailed to allposterity,
even to the generalall-ending day.
So wise so young, theysay, do ne'er live long.
What say you, Uncle?
I say without characters,fame lives long.
That Julius Caesar was afamous man.
With what his valor didenrich his wit,
his wit set down to makehis valor live.
Death makes no conquest ofthis conqueror,
for now he lives in fame,though not in life.
I'll tell you what, mycousin Buckingham.
What, my gracious lord?
An if I live until I be aman,
I'll win our ancient rightin France again
or die a soldier as Ilived a king.
Short summers lightly havea forward spring.
Now in good time, herecomes the Duke of York.
Richard of York.
How fares our lovingbrother?
Well, my dread lord; somust I call you now.
Aye, brother, to ourgrief, as it is yours.
Too late he died thatmight have kept that title
which by his death hathlost much majesty.
How fares our cousin,noble lord of York?
I thank you, gentle uncle.
O, my lord, you said that idleweeds are fast in growth.
The prince my brother hathoutgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.
And therefore, is he idle?
O, my fair cousin, I mustnot say so.
Then is he more beholdingto you than I.
He may command me as mysovereign,
but you have power in meas in a kinsman.
I pray you, uncle, give methis dagger.
My dagger, little cousin?
With all my heart.
A beggar, brother?
Of my kind uncle, that Iknow will give
and being but a toy, whichis no grief to give.
A greater gift than thatI'll give my cousin.
A greater gift.
Then that's the sword toit.
Aye, gentle cousin, wereit light enough.
O, then I see you will butpart with light gifts.
In weightier things,you'll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for yourgrace to wear.
I weigh it lightly, wereit heavier.
What? Would you have myweapon, little lord?
I would, that I mightthank you as you call me.
How?
Little.
My lord of York will stillbe cross in talk.
Uncle, your grace knowshow to bear with him.
You mean to bear me, notto bear with me.
Uncle, my brother mocksboth you and me.
Because that I am littlelike an ape,
he thinks that you shouldbear me on your shoulders.
With what a sharp-providedwit he reasons.
To mitigate the scorn hegives his uncle,
he prettily and aptlytaunts himself.
So cunning and so young iswonderful.
My lord, will it pleaseyou pass along?
Myself and my good cousinBuckingham will to your mother
to entreat of her to meetyou at the Tower andwelcome you.
What? Will you go unto theTower, my lord?
My lord protector needswill have it so.
I shall not sleep in quietat the Tower.
Why? What should you fear?
Marry, my uncle Clarence'angry ghost.
My grandam told me he wasmurdered there.
I fear no uncles dead.
Nor none that live, Ihope.
An if they live, I hope Ineed not fear.
But come, my lord.
With a heavy heart,thinking on them,
go I unto the Tower.
Think you, my lord, thislittle prating York
was not incensed by hissubtle mother
to taunt and scorn youthus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt.
O, 'tis a parlous boy:
bold, quick, ingenious,forward, capable.
He is all the mother'sfrom the top to toe.
Well, let them rest.
Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeplyto effect what we intend
as closely to conceal whatwe impart.
What think'st thou?
Is it not an easy matter
to make William LordHastings of our mind
for the installment ofthis noble duke
in the seat royal of thisfamous isle?
He for his father's sakeso loves the prince
that he will not be won toaught against him.
What think'st thou, then,of Stanley?
What will he?
He will do all in all asHastings doth.
Well, then, no more butthis.
Go, gentle Catesby.
And as it were far off,sound thou Lord Hastings,
how he doth stand affectedto our purpose.
And summon him tomorrow tothe Tower
to sit about thecoronation.
If thou dost find himtractable to us,
encourage him, and tellhim all our reasons.
If he be leaden, icy-cold,unwilling,
be thou so too and sobreak off the talk
and give us notice of hisinclination,
for we tomorrow holddivided councils
wherein thyself shallhighly be employed.
Commend me to LordHastings.
Tell him, Catesby,
his ancient knot ofdangerous adversaries
tomorrow are let blood atPomfret Castle.
And bid my lord for joy ofthis good news
give Mistress Shore onegentle kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go; effectthis business soundly.
My good lords both, withall the heed I can.
Shall we hear from you,Catesby, ere we sleep?
You shall, my lord.
At Crosby Place, thereshall you find us both.
Now, my lord, what shallwe do
if we perceive LordHastings will not yield toour complots?
Chop off his head, man.
Somewhat we will do.
And look, when I am king,
claim thou of me theearldom of Hereford
and all the movables
whereof the king mybrother was possessed.
I'll claim that promise atyour grace's hands.
And look to have ityielded with all kindness.
Come, let us sup betimes,
that afterwards, we may digestour complots in some form.
My lord.
Who knocks?
One from the Lord Stanley.
What is't o'clock?
Upon the stroke of four.
Cannot my Lord Stanleysleep these tedious nights?
So it appears by that Ihave to say.
First, he commends him tothe noble sir.
And what then?
Then sends upon yourlordship that this night,
he dreamt the boar hadrazed off his helm.
Besides, he says there aretwo councils kept
and that may be determinedat the one
which may make you and himto rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to knowyour lordship's pleasure,
if you will presently takehorse with him
and with all speed postwith him toward the north
and shun the danger thathis soul divines.
Go, fellow, go.
Return unto thy lord.
Bid him not fear theseparated council.
His honor and myself areat the one,
and at the other is mygood friend Catesby,
where nothing can proceedthat toucheth us
whereof I shall not haveintelligence.
Tell him his fears areshallow, without instance.
And for his dreams, Iwonder he is so simple
to trust the mockery ofunquiet slumbers.
To fly the boar before theboar pursues
were to incense the boarto follow us
and make pursuit where hedid mean no chase.
Go.
Bid thy master rise andcome to me,
and we will both togetherto the Tower,
where he shall see, theboar will use us kindly.
I'll go, my lord, and tellhim what you say.
Oh.
Many good morrows to mynoble lord.
Good morrow, Catesby.
You are early stirring.
What news?
What news, in this, ourtottering state?
O, it is a reeling worldindeed, my lord.
And I believe 'twill neverstand upright
till Richard wear thegarland of the realm.
How wear the garland?
O, dost thou mean thecrown?
Aye, my good lord.
I'll have this crown ofmine cut from my shoulders
before I'll see the crownso foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess thathe doth aim at it?
Aye, on my life.
And hopes to find youforward upon his party
for the gain thereof.
And thereupon he sends youthis good news:
that this same very day,your enemies,
the kindred of the queen,must die at Pomfret.
Indeed, I am no mournerfor this news...
Because they have beenstill my adversaries.
But that I'll give myvoice on Richard's side,
to bar my master's heirsin true descent,
God knows I will not doit.
To the death.
God keep your lordship inthat gracious mind.
But I shall laugh at thisa twelve-month hence,
that they which brought mein my master's hate,
I live to look upon theirtragedy.
O, Catesby.
Ere a fortnight make meolder,
I'll send some packingthat yet think not on't.
'Tis a vile thing to die,my gracious lord,
when men are unpreparedand look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous.
So falls it out withRivers, Vaughan, Grey.
And so 'twill do with somemen else
who think themselves assafe as thou and I,
who, as thou know'st,
are dear to princelyRichard and to Buckingham.
The princes both make highaccount of you,
for they account his headupon the bridge.
I know they do.
And I have well deservedit.
Come on, come on.
Where is your boar spear,man?
Fear you the boar and goso unprovided?
My lord, good morrow.
Morrow, Catesby.
You may jest on, but bythe holy rood,
I do not like theseseveral councils, I...
My lord, I hold my life asdear as you.
And never in my days, I doprotest,
was it so precious to meas 'tis now.
Think you but that I knowour state secure,
I would be so triumphantas I am?
The lords at Pomfret,
when they rode fromLondon, were jocund
and supposed their stateswere sure,
and they indeed had nocause to mistrust,
and yet you see how soonthe day o'ercast.
This sudden stab of rancorI misdoubt.
Pray God, I say, I prove aneedless coward.
What, shall we toward theTower?
The night is spent.
Come, come; have with you.
Wot you what, my lord?
Today the lords you talkedof are beheaded.
They for their truth mightbetter wear their heads
than some that have accusedthem wear their hats.
Come, my lord; let's away.
Go on before.
I'll talk with this goodfellow.
Well met, Hastings.
How goes the world withthee?
The better that yourlordship please to ask.
I tell thee, man, 'tisbetter with me now
than when I met thee last.
Where now we meet,
then was I going prisonerto the Tower
by the suggestion of thequeen's allies.
But now I tell thee-- keepit to thyself--
this day, those enemiesare put to death,
and I in better state thane'er I was.
God hold it to yourhonor's good content.
Gramercy, Hastings.
There.
Drink that for me.
Why, thank you, Robert.
Well met, my lord.
I am glad to see yourhonor.
I thank you kindly, goodSir John.
I am in your debt for yourlast exercise.
Come the next Sabbath, Iwill content you.
What, talking with apriest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret,they do need the priest.
Your honor hath noshriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I metthis holy man,
the men you talked of cameinto my mind.
What, go you toward theTower?
I do, my lord.
But long I cannot staythere.
I shall return before yourlordship thence.
Hey, like enough, for Istay dinner there.
And supper too, althoughthou know'st it not.
I'll wait upon yourlordship.
Come. Shall we go?
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, letme tell thee this:
Today shalt thou behold asubject die
for truth, for duty, andfor loyalty!
God bless the prince fromall the pack of you.
A knot you are of damnedbloodsuckers!
You live that shall crywoe for this hereafter!
Dispatch; the limit ofyour lives is out.
O Pomfret, Pomfret!
O thou bloody prison,
fatal and ominous to noblepeers.
Within the guilty closureof thy walls,
Richard II here was hackedto death.
And for more slander tothy dismal seat,
we give to thee ourguiltless blood to drink.
Now Margaret's curse isfallen upon our heads
when she exclaimed onHastings, you, and I,
for standing by whenRichard stabbed her son.
Then cursed she Richard.
Then cursed sheBuckingham.
Then cursed she Hastings.
O, remember, God,
to hear her prayer forthem as now for us
and for my sister and herprincely sons.
Be satisfied, dear God,with our true blood,
which, as thou know'st,unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste.
The hour of death isexpiate.
Come, Grey.
Come, Vaughan.
Let us here embrace.
Farewell until we meetagain in Heaven.
Now, noble peers, thecause why we are met
is to determine of thecoronation.
In God's name, speak.
When is the royal day?
Is all things ready forthe royal time?
It is, and wants butnomination.
Tomorrow, then, I judgethe happy day.
Who knows the lordprotector's mind herein?
Who is most inward withthe noble duke?
Your grace, we think, shouldsoonest know his mind.
We know each other'sfaces.
For our hearts,
he knows no more of minethan I of yours
or I of his, my lord, thanyou of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and heare near in love.
I thank his grace. I knowhe loves me well.
But for his purpose in thecoronation,
I have not sounded him,
nor he delivered his graciouspleasure any way therein.
But you, my honorablelords, may name the time,
and in the duke's behalf,I'll give my voice,
which, I presume, he'lltake in gentle part.
Ah, in happy time, herecomes the duke himself.
My noble lords and cousinsall, good morrow.
I have been long asleeper.
But I trust my absence dothneglect no great design
which by my presence mighthave been concluded.
Had not you come upon yourcue, my lord,
William, Lord Hastings,had pronounced your part--
I mean, your voice-- forcrowning of the king.
Than my lord Hastings, noman might be bolder.
His lordship knows me welland loves me well.
My lord of Ely.
When I was last inHolborn,
I saw good strawberries inyour garden there.
I do beseech you send forsome of them.
Marry, and will, my lord,with all my heart.
Cousin of Buckingham, aword with you.
Catesby hath soundedHastings in our business
and finds the testygentleman so hot
that he will lose his headere give consent
his master's child, asworshipfully he terms it,
shall lose the royalty ofEngland's throne.
Withdraw yourself awhile.
I'll go with you.
We have not yet set downthis day of triumph.
Tomorrow, in my judgment,is too sudden,
for I myself am not sowell provided
as else I would be werethe day prolonged.
Where is my lord, the dukeof Gloucester?
I have sent for thesestrawberries.
His grace looks cheerfullyand smooth today.
There's some conceit orother likes him well
when that he bids goodmorrow with such spirit.
I think there's never aman in Christendom
can lesser hide his loveor hate than he,
for by his face, straightshall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceiveyou in his face
by any livelihood heshowed today?
Marry, that with no manhere he is offended.
For were he, he had shownit in his looks.
I pray God he be not, Isay.
I pray you all,
tell me what they deservethat do conspire my death
with devilish plots ofdamned witchcraft
and that have prevailedupon my body
with their hellish charms.
The tender love I bearyour grace, my lord,
makes me most forward inthis princely presence
to doom the offenders,whatsoe'er they be.
I say, my lord, they havedeserved death.
Then be your eyes thewitness of their evil.
See how I am bewitched.
Behold.
Mine arm is, like a blastedsapling, withered up.
And this is Edward's wife,that monstrous witch,
consorted with that harlotstrumpet Shore,
that by their witchcraftthus have marked me.
If they have done thisdeed, my noble lord--
If! Thou protector of thisdamned strumpet!
Talk'st thou to me of"ifs"?
Thou art a traitor.
Off with his head!
Now by Saint Paul, Iswear,
I will not dine until Isee the same.
Lovel and Ratcliffe, lookthat it be done.
The rest that love me,rise and follow me.
O woe.
Woe for England.
Not a whit for me.
For I, too fond, mighthave prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boardid raze his helm.
And I did scorn it anddistained to fly.
Three times today, myfoot-cloth horse did stumble
and started when he lookedupon the Tower,
as loath to bear me to theslaughterhouse.
Oh, now I need the priestthat spake to me.
I now repent I told thepursuivant as too triumphing
how mine enemies today atPomfret bloodily werebutchered
and I myself secure ingrace and favor.
Oh, Margaret, Margaret.
Now thy heavy curse islighted on poor Hastings'wretched head.
Come, come, dispatch.
The duke would be atdinner.
Make a short shrift.
He longs to see your head.
O momentary grace ofmortal men,
which we more hunt forthan the grace of God.
Who builds his hope in airof your good looks
lives like a drunkensailor on a mast,
ready with every nod totumble down
into the fatal bowels ofthe deep.
Come, come, dispatch.
'Tis bootless to exclaim.
Bloody Richard!
Miserable England.
I prophesy the fearfulesttime to thee
that ever wretched agehath looked upon.
Come.
Lead me to the block.
Bear him my head.
They smile at me whoshortly shall be dead.
Come, cousin.
Canst thou quake andchange thy color,
murder thy breath in themiddle of a word,
and then again begin andstop again
as if thou were distraughtand mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit thedeep tragedian.
Speak and look back.
Pry on every side,
Tremble and start atwagging of a straw,
intending deep suspicion.
Ghastly looks are at myservice like enforced smiles.
And both are ready intheir offices at any time
to grace my stratagems.
What, is Catesby gone?
He is.
And see, he brings themayor along.
Lord mayor!
Look to the drawbridgethere!
Hark, a drum!
Catesby, o'erlook thewalls.
Lord mayor, the reason wehave sent--
Look back! Defend thee!
Here are enemies!
O God and our innocence,defend and guard us.
Be patient; they are friends,Ratcliffe and Lovel.
Here is the head of thatignoble traitor,
the dangerous andunsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the manthat I must weep.
I took him for theplainest harmless creature
that breathed upon theearth a Christian,
made him my book whereinmy soul recorded
the history of all hersecret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed hisvice with show of virtue
that his apparent openguilt omitted--
I mean, his conversationwith Shore's wife--
he lived from allattainder of suspects.
Well, well.
He was the covertestsheltered traitor!
Would you imagine oralmost believe,
were't not that by greatpreservation
we live to tell it,
that the subtle traitorthis day
had plotted in the councilhouse
to murder me and my goodlord of Gloucester?
Had he done so?
What?
Think you we are Turks orinfidels?
Or that we would againstthe form of law
proceed thus rashly in thevillain's death,
but that the extreme perilof the case--
the peace of England andour persons' safety--
enforced us to thisexecution?
Now, fair befall you, hedeserved his death.
And your good graces bothhave well proceeded
to warn false traitorsfrom the like attempts.
I never looked for betterat his hands
after he once fell in withMistress Shore.
Yet had we not determinedhe should die
until your lordship cameto see his end,
which now the loving hasteof these our friends,
something against ourmeaning have prevented
because, my lord,
we would have had youheard the traitor speak
and timorously confess
the manner and the purposeof his treason,
that you might well havesignified
the same unto thecitizens,
who haply may misconstrue usin him and wail his death.
But, my good lord, yourgraces' word shall serve
as well as I had seen andheard him speak.
And do not doubt, rightnoble princes both,
but I'll acquaint ourduteous citizens
with all your justproceedings in this cause.
And to that end, we wishedyour lordship here:
to avoid the censures ofthe carping world.
Which, since you came toolate of our intent,
yet witness what you hearwe did intend.
So, my good lord mayor,
we bid farewell.
Go after, after, cousinBuckingham!
The mayor towards Guildhallhies him all in post.
There, at your meet'stadvantage of the time,
infer the bastardy ofEdward's children.
Moreover, urge his hatefulluxury
and bestial appetite inchange of lust,
which stretched unto theirservants, daughters, wives,
even where his raging eyeand savage heart
without control lusted tomake a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus farcome near my person.
Tell them when that mymother went of child
of that insatiate Edward,
noble York, my princelyfather, then had wars inFrance
and by true computation ofthe time
found that the issue wasnot his begot,
which well appeared in hislineaments,
being nothing like thenoble duke my father.
Yet touch this sparingly,as 'twere far off,
because, my lord, you knowmy mother lives.
Doubt not, my lord, I'llplay the orator
as if the golden fee for whichI plead were for myself.
And so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bringthem to Baynard's Castle,
where you will find mewell accompanied
with reverend fathers andwell-learned bishops.
I go, and towards three orfour o'clock,
look for the news that theGuildhall affords.
Go, Lovel, with all speedto Doctor Shaw.
Go thou to Friar Penker.
Bid them both meet mewithin this hour atBaynard's Castle.
Now will I go to take someprivy order
to draw the brats ofClarence out of sight
and to give notice that nomanner person have any time
recourse unto the princes.
Ratcliffe.
Here is the indictment ofthe good lord Hastings,
which in a set hand fairlyis engrossed
that it may be today reado'er in Paul's.
And mark how well thesequel hangs together.
Eleven hours I have spentto write it over,
for yesternight by Catesbywas it sent me.
The precedent was full aslong a-doing.
And yet within these fivehours, Hastings lived,
untainted, unexamined,free, at liberty.
Here's a good world thewhile.
Who is so gross that cannotsee this palpable device?
Yet who is so bold butsays he sees it not?
Bad is the world, and allwill come to naught
when such ill dealing mustbe seen in thought.
How now? How now? What saythe citizens?
Now, by the holy mother ofour Lord,
the citizens are mum, saynot a word.
Touched you the bastardyof Edward's children?
I did.
With his contract withLady Lucy
and his contract by deputyin France,
the insatiate greedinessof his desire
and his enforcement of thecity wives,
his tyranny for trifle,
his own bastardy, as being got,your father then in France,
and his resemblance beingnot like the duke.
Withal, I did infer yourlineaments
being the right idea ofyour father
both in your form andnobleness of mind.
Laid open all yourvictories in Scotland,
your discipline in war,your wisdom in peace,
your bounty, virtue, fairhumility.
Indeed, left nothing fittingfor your purpose untouched
or slightly handled indiscourse.
And when mine oratory drewto an end,
I bid them that did lovetheir country's good
cry "God save Richard,England's royal king."
And did they so?
No.
God help me, they spakenot a word
but like dumb statues orbreathing stones,
stared each on other andlooked deadly pale,
which, when I saw, Ireprehended them
and asked the mayor whatmeant this willful silence.
His answer was,
the people were not usedto being spoke to
but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tellmy tale again,
"Thus saith the duke, thushath the duke inferred,"
but nothing spake inwarrant from himself.
When he had done,
some followers of mine ownat the lower end of the hall
hurled up their caps,
and some ten voices cried,"God save King Richard."
Thus I took the vantage ofthose few.
"Thanks, gentle citizensand friends," quoth I.
"This general applause andcheerful shout
argues your wisdoms andyour love to Richard"
and even here brake offand came away.
What tongueless blockswere they!
Would they not speak?
No.
Will not the mayor thenand his brethren come?
The mayor is here at hand.
Intend some fear.
Be not you spoke with butby mighty suit.
And look you get a prayerbook in your hand
and stand between twochurchmen, good my lord.
For on that ground, I'llbuild a holy descant
and be not easily won toour request.
Play the maid's part, stillanswer nay, and take it.
I go.
And if you plead as wellfor them
as I can say nay to theefor myself,
no doubt we bring it to ahappy issue.
Go; go up to the leads.
The lord mayor knocks.
Oh, welcome, my lord.
I dance attendance here.
I think the duke will notbe spoke withal.
Oh, now, Catesby.
What says your lord to myrequest?
He doth entreat yourgrace, my noble lord,
to visit him tomorrow ornext day.
He is within, with tworight reverend fathers,
divinely bent tomeditation,
and in no worldly suitswould he be moved
to draw him from his holyexercise.
Return, good Catesby, tothe gracious duke.
Tell him myself, themayor, and aldermen
in deep designs and matterof great moment,
no less importing than ourgeneral good,
are come to have someconference with his grace.
I'll signify so much untohim straight.
Ah, ha, my lord, thisprince is not an Edward.
He is not lolling on alewd love bed
but on his knees atmeditation,
not dallying with a braceof courtesans
but meditating with twodeep divines,
not sleeping to engrosshis idle body,
but praying to enrich hiswatchful soul.
Happy were England wouldthis virtuous prince
take on his grace thesovereignty thereof.
But sure, I fear, we shallnot win him to it.
Marry, God defend hisgrace should say us nay.
I fear he will.
Here Catesby comes again.
Now, Catesby, what sayshis grace?
He wonders to what end youhave assembled
such troops of citizens tocome to him,
his grace not being warnedthereof before.
He fears, my lord, youmean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousinshould suspect me,
that I mean no good tohim.
By Heaven, we come to himin perfect love.
And so return and tell hisgrace.
When holy and devout religiousmen are at their beads,
'tis much to draw themthence,
so sweet is zealouscontemplation.
See where his grace stands:tween two clergymen.
Two props of virtue for aChristian prince,
to stay him from the fallof vanity.
And, see, a book of prayerin his hand,
true ornaments to know aholy man.
Famous Plantagenet,
most gracious prince,
lend favorable ear to ourrequest
and pardon us theinterruption of thy devotion
and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs nosuch apology.
I do beseech your grace topardon me,
who, earnest in theservice of my God,
deferred the visitation ofmy friends.
But leaving this, what isyour grace's pleasure?
Even that, I hope, whichpleaseth God above
and all good men of thisungoverned isle.
I do suspect I have donesome offense
that seems disgracious inthe city's eye
and that you come toreprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord!
Would it might please yourgrace
on our entreaties to amendthat fault?
Else wherefore breathe Iin a Christian land?
Know then it is your faultthat you resign thesupreme seat,
the throne majestical,
the sceptered office ofyour ancestors
to the corruption of ablemished stock.
Whilst in the mildness ofyour sleepy thoughts,
which here we waken to ourcountry's good,
the noble isle doth wanther proper limbs.
Her face defaced withscars of infamy,
her royal stock graft withignoble plants,
which to recure, weheartily solicit yourgracious self
to take on you the chargeand kingly government
of this your land,
not as protector, steward,substitute,
or lowly factor foranother's gain,
but as successively fromblood to blood,
your right of birth, yourempery, your own.
For this, consorted withthe citizens,
your very worshipful andloving friends,
and by their vehementinstigation,
in this just cause come Ito move your grace.
I cannot tell if to departin silence
or bitterly to speak inyour reproof
best fitteth my degree oryour condition.
If not to answer, youmight haply think
tongue-tied ambition, notreplying,
yielded to bear the goldenyoke of sovereignty
which fondly you wouldhere impose on me.
If to reprove you for thissuit of yours,
so seasoned with yourfaithful love to me,
then, on the other side, Ichecked my friends.
Therefore, to speak and toavoid the first
and then, in speaking, notto incur the last,
definitively thus I answeryou.
Your love deserves mythanks,
but my desert unmeritableshuns your high request.
First, if all obstacleswere cut away
and that my path were evento the crown,
as the ripe revenue anddue of birth,
yet so much is my povertyof spirit,
so mighty and so many mydefects,
that I would rather hideme from my greatness,
being a bark to brook nomighty sea,
than in my greatness covetto be hid
and in the vapor of myglory smothered.
But, God be thanked, thereis no need of me,
and much I need to helpyou, were there need.
The royal tree hath leftus royal fruit,
which, mellowed by thestealing hours of time,
will well become the seatof majesty
and make, no doubt, ushappy by his reign.
On him I lay that youwould lay on me,
the right and fortune ofhis happy stars,
which God defend that Ishould wring from him.
My lord, this arguesconscience in your grace,
but the respects thereofare nice and trivial,
all circumstances wellconsidered.
You say that Edward isyour brother's son.
So say we too...
but not by Edward's wife!
For first was he contractto Lady Lucy--
your mother lives awitness to his vow--
and afterwards by substitutebetroth'd to Bona,
sister to the king ofFrance.
These both put off a poorpetitioner,
a care-crazed mother tomany sons,
a beauty-waning anddistressed widow,
even in the afternoon ofher best days
made prize and purchase ofhis wanton eye,
seduced the pitch and theheight of his degree
to base declension andloathed bigamy.
By her in his unlawfulbed, he got this Edward,
whom our manners call theprince.
More bitterly could Iexpostulate,
save that for reverence tosome alive,
I give a sparing limit tomy tongue.
Therefore, good my lord,take to your royal self
this proffered benefit ofdignity,
if not to bless us and theland withal,
yet to draw forth yournoble ancestry
from the corruption ofabusing times
unto a lineal,true-derived course.
Do, good my lord; yourcitizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord,this proffered love.
O, make them joyful; granttheir lawful suit.
Alas, why would you heapthis care on me?
I am unfit for state andmajesty.
I do beseech you, take itnot amiss.
I cannot nor I will notyield to you.
If you refuse it-- as inlove and zeal,
loath to depose the child,your brother's son,
as well we know yourtenderness of heart
and gentle, kind,effeminate remorse,
which we have noted in youto your kindred
and equally indeed to allestates--
yet know, whether youaccept our suit or no,
your brother's son shallnever reign our king.
But we shall plant someother in the throne,
to the disgrace anddownfall of your house.
And with this resolution,here we leave you.
Come, citizens.
'Zounds!
I'll entreat no more.
O, do not swear, my lordof Buckingham.
Call them again, sweetprince.
Accept their suit.
If you deny them, all theland will rue it!
Will you enforce me to aworld of cares?
Call them again.
I am not made of stones
but penetrable to yourkind entreaties,
albeit against myconscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham
and sage, grave men...
since you will bucklefortune on my back,
to bear her burden, whe'erI will or no,
I must have patience toendure the load.
But if black scandal orfoul-faced reproach
attend the sequel of yourimposition,
your mere enforcementshall acquittance me
from all the impure blotsand stains thereof.
For God doth know and youmay partly see
how far I am from thedesire of this.
God bless your grace.
We see it and will say it.
In saying so, you shallbut say the truth.
Then I salute you withthis royal title.
Long live Richard,England's worthy king!
Amen.
Tomorrow may it please youto be crowned?
Even when you please, foryou will have it so.
Tomorrow, then, we willattend your grace.
And so most joyfully, wetake our leave.
Come, let us to our holywork again.
Farewell, my cousin.
Farewell, gentle friends.
Who meets us here?
Daughter, well met.
God give your graces both
a happy and a joyful timeof day.
As much to you, goodsister.
Whither away?
No farther than the Tower
and as I guess, upon thelike devotion as yourselves:
to gratulate the gentleprinces there.
Kind sister, thanks.
We'll enter all together.
And in good time, here thelieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, prayyou, by your leave,
how doth the prince and myyoung son of York?
Right well, dear madam.
By your patience,
I may not suffer you tovisit them.
The king hath strictlycharged the contrary.
The king?
Who's that?
I mean the lord protector.
The Lord protect him fromthat kingly title.
Hath he set bounds betweentheir love and me?
I am their mother.
Who shall bar me fromthem?
I am their father'smother.
I will see them.
Their aunt I am in law, inlove their mother.
Then bring me to theirsights.
I'll bear thy blame
and take thy office fromthee, on my peril.
No, madam, no.
I may not leave it so.
I am bound by oath,
and therefore pardon me.
Let me but greet you,ladies, one hour hence,
and I'll salute your graceof York as mother
and reverend looker-on oftwo fair queens.
Come, madam, you muststraight to Westminster,
there to be crownedRichard's royal queen.
O, cut my lace asunder
that my pent heart mayhave some scope to beat,
or else I swoon with thisdead-killing news.
Be of good cheer, Mother.
How fares your grace?
O Dorset, speak not to me.Get thee gone.
Death and destruction dogsthee at the heels.
Thy mother's name isominous to children.
If thou wilt outstripdeath, go cross the seas
and live with Richmondfrom the reach of hell.
Go! Hie thee.
Hie thee from thisslaughterhouse,
lest thou increase thenumber of the dead
and make me die the thrallof Margaret's curse,
nor mother, wife, norEngland's counted queen!
Full of wise care is thisyour counsel, madam.
Take all the swiftadvantage of the hours.
You shall have lettersfrom me to my son
in your behalf to meet youon the way.
Be not ta'en tardy byunwise delay.
O ill-dispersing wind ofmisery.
O my accursed womb, thebed of death.
A cockatrice hast thouhatched to the world
whose unavoided eye ismurderous.
Come, madam, come. I inall haste was sent.
And I with allunwillingness will go.
Oh, would to God that theinclusive verge of goldenmetal
that must round my browwere red-hot steel
to sear me to the brains.
Anointed let me be withdeadly venom
and die ere men can say"God save the queen."
Go, go, poor soul.
I envy not thy glory.
To feed my humor, wishthyself no harm.
No.
Why?
When he that is my husbandnow
came to me as I followedHenry's corse
when scarce the blood waswell-washed from his hands
which issued from my otherangel husband
and that dear saint whichthen I, weeping, followed.
O, when I say I look'd onRichard's face,
this was my wish:
"Be thou," quoth I,
"accursed for making me,so young, so old a widow.
"And when thou wed'st, letsorrow haunt thy bed.
"And be thy wife, if anybe so mad,
"more miserable by thelife of thee
than thou hast made me bymy dear lord's death."
Lo, ere I can repeat thiscurse again
within so small a time,
my woman's heart grossly grewcaptive to his honey words
and proved the subject ofmine own soul's curse,
which hitherto hath heldmy eyes from rest.
For never yet one hour inhis bed
did I enjoy the golden dewof sleep
but with his timorousdreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me formy father, Warwick,
and will no doubt shortlybe rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu.
I pity thy complaining.
No more than with my soulI mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woefulwelcomer of glory.
Adieu, poor soul thattakest thy leave of it.
Go thou to Richmond, andgood fortune guide thee.
Go thou to Richard, andgood angels tend thee.
Go thou to sanctuary, andgood thoughts possess thee.
I to my grave, where peaceand rest lie with me.
Stay.
Yet look back with me untothe Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones,those tender babes
whom envy hath immuredwithin your walls.
Rough cradle for suchlittle pretty ones.
Rude ragged nurse,
old sullen playfellow fortender princes,
use my babies well.
So foolish sorrow bidsyour stones farewell.
Stand all apart!
Cousin of Buckingham.
My gracious sovereign.
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy adviceand thy assistance,
is King Richard seated.
But shall we wear theseglories for a day,
or shall they last and werejoice in them?
Still live they,
and forever let them last.
Ah, Buckingham,
now do I play the touch
to try if thou be currentgold indeed.
Young Edward lives.
Think now what I wouldspeak.
Say on, my loving lord.
Why, Buckingham, I say Iwould be king,
Why, so you are, mythrice-renowned lord.
Am I king?
'Tis so.
But Edward lives.
True, noble prince.
A bitter consequence thatEdward still should live:
"True, noble prince."
Cousin, thou wast not wontto be so dull.
Shall I be plain?
I wish the bastards dead,
and I would have itsuddenly performed.
What sayest thou now?
Speak suddenly. Be brief.
Your grace may do yourpleasure.
Tut, tut, thou art allice.
Thy kindness freezeth.
Say, have I thy consentthat they shall die?
Give me some littlebreath,
some pause, dear lord,
before I positively speakof this.
I will resolve you hereinpresently.
The king is angry.
See, he gnaws his lip.
I will converse withiron-witted fools andunrespective boys.
None are for me that look intome with considerate eyes.
High-reaching Buckinghamgrows circumspect.
Boy.
My lord.
Knowest thou not any whomcorrupting gold
will tempt unto a closeexploit of death?
I know a discontentedgentleman
whose humble means matchnot his haughty spirit.
Gold were as good astwenty orators
and will, no doubt, tempthim to any thing.
What is his name?
His name, my lord, isTyrrel.
I partly know the man.
Go, call him hither.
The deep-revolving wittyBuckingham
no more shall be theneighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held outwith me untired,
and stops he now forbreath?
Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley,what's the news?
Know, my loving lord,
the marquis Dorset, as Ihear, is fled to Richmond,
in the parts where heabides.
Come hither, Catesby.
Rumor it abroad that Anne,my wife,
is very grievous sick.
I will take order for herkeeping close.
Inquire me out somemean-poor gentleman
whom I will marry straightto Clarence' daughter.
The boy is foolish, and Ifear not him.
Look how thou dreamest.
I say again,
give out that Anne my queenis sick and like to die.
About it, for it stands memuch upon
to stop all hopes whosegrowth may damage me.
I must be married to mybrother's daughter,
or else my kingdom standson brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, andthen marry her:
uncertain way of gain.
But I am in so far in bloodthat sin will pluck on sin.
Tear-falling pity dwellsnot in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?
James Tyrrel, and yourmost obedient subject.
Art thou, indeed?
Prove me, my graciouslord.
Darest thou resolve tokill a friend of mine?
Please you, but I hadrather kill two enemies.
Why, then thou hast it.
Two deep enemies,
foes to my rest and mysweet sleep's disturbers
are they that I would havethee deal upon.
Tyrrel, I mean thosebastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means tocome to them,
and soon I'll rid you fromthe fear of them.
Thou singest sweet music.
Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.
Go by this token.
Rise and lend thine ear.
There is no more but so.
Say it is done,
and I will love thee andprefer thee for it.
I will dispatch itstraight.
My lord, I have consideredin my mind
the late request that youdid sound me in.
Well, let that rest.
Dorset is fled toRichmond.
I hear the news, my lord.
Stanley, he is your wife'sson.
Well, look unto it.
My lord, I claim the gift,my due by promise,
for which your honor andyour faith is pawned:
the earldom of Hereford
and the movables which youhave promised I shallpossess.
Stanley, look to yourwife.
If she convey letters toRichmond, you shall answer it.
What says your highness tomy just demand?
I do remember me, Henry VIdid prophesy
that Richmond should beking
when Richmond was a littlepeevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps--
My lord.
How chance the prophetcould not at that timehave told me,
I being by, that I shouldkill him?
My lord, your promise forthe earldom--
Richmond.
When last I was at Exeter,
the mayor in courtesyshowed me the castle there
and called it Rougemont,
at which name I started
because a bard of Irelandtold me once
I should not live longafter I saw Richmond.
My lord.
Aye, what's't o'clock?
I am thus bold
to put your grace in mindof what you promised me.
Well, but what's'to'clock?
Upon the stroke of ten.
Then let it strike.
Why let it strike?
Because that like a jackthou keepest the stroke
between thy begging and mymeditation.
I am not in the givingvein today.
May it please you toresolve me my suit.
Thou troublest me.
I am not in the vein.
And is it thus?
Repays he my deep service
with such contempt?
Made I him king for this?
O, let me think onHastings and be gone
to Brecknock while myfearful head is on.
The tyrannous and bloodyact is done,
the most arch deed ofpiteous massacre
that ever yet this landwas guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest,
who I did suborn to do thispiece of ruthless butchery,
albeit they were fleshedvillains, bloody dogs,
melted with tenderness andmild compassion,
wept like two children intheir deaths' sad story.
"Oh, thus" quoth Dighton,"lay the gentle babes."
"Thus, thus," quothForrest,
"girdling one anotherwithin their alabaster,innocent arms.
"Their lips were four redroses on a stalk
"and in their summerbeauty, kissed each other.
"A book of prayers ontheir pillow lay,
"which once," quoth Forrest,"almost changed my mind,
but O! The devil!"
There the villain stoppedwhen Dighton thus told on:
"We smothered the mostreplenished sweet workof nature
that from the primecreation e'er she framed."
Hence both are gone...
with conscience andremorse.
They could not speak.
And so I left them both
to bear this tidings tothe bloody king.
And here he comes.
All health, my sovereignlord.
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy inthy news?
If to have done the thingyou gave in charge
beget your happiness,
be happy then, for it isdone.
But didst thou see themdead?
I did, my lord.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
The chaplain of the Towerhath buried them,
but where, to say thetruth, I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soonat after supper,
when thou shalt tell theprocess of their death.
Meantime, but think how Imay do thee good
and be inheritor of thydesire.
Farewell till then.
I humbly take my leave.
The son of Clarence have Ipent up close.
His daughter meanly have Imatched in marriage.
The sons of Edward sleepin Abraham's bosom,
and Anne my wife hath bidthis world good night.
Now, for I know the BretonRichmond
aims at young Elizabeth,my brother's daughter,
and by that knot looksproudly on the crown,
to her go I, a jollythriving wooer.
My lord?
Good or bad news, thatthou comest in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord.
Ely is fled to Richmond,
and Buckingham, backedwith the hardy Welshmen,
is in the field, and stillhis power increaseth.
Ely with Richmond troublesme more near
than Buckingham and hisrash-levied strength.
Come, I have learned thatfearful commenting
is leaden servitor to dulldelay.
Go, muster men.
My counsel is my shield.
We must be brief whentraitors brave the field.
So now prosperity beginsto mellow
and drop into the rottenmouth of death.
Here in these confines,slyly have I lurked
to watch the waning ofmine enemies.
O, a dire induction am Iwitness to
and will to France,
hoping the consequencewill prove
as bitter, black, andtragical.
Withdraw thee, wretchedMargaret.
Who comes here?
Ah, my poor princes.
Ah, my tender babes,
my unblown flowers,new-appearing sweets.
If yet your gentle soulsfly in the air
and be not fixed in doomperpetual,
hover about me with yourairy wings
and hear your mother'slamentation.
Hover about her.
Say that right for right
hath dimmed your infantmorn to aged night.
So many miseries havecrazed my voice
that my woe-wearied tongueis still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, whyart thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quitPlantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays adying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly fromsuch gentle lambs
and throw them in theentrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep whensuch a deed was done?
When holy Harry died andmy sweet son.
Dead life, blind sight,
poor mortal living ghost.
Woe's scene, world'sshame,
grave's due by lifeusurped,
brief abstract and recordof tedious days,
rest thy unrest onEngland's lawful earth,
unlawfully made drunk withinnocent blood.
Ah, that thou wouldst assoon afford a grave
as thou canst yield amelancholy seat.
Then would I hide mybones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause tomourn but we?
If ancient sorrow be mostreverend,
give mine the benefit ofseniory
and let my griefs frown onthe upper hand.
If sorrow can admitsociety,
tell o'er your woes againby viewing mine.
I had an Edward till aRichard killed him.
I had a husband till aRichard killed him.
Thou hadst an Edward tilla Richard killed him.
Thou hadst a Richard tilla Richard killed him.
I had a Richard too, andthou didst kill him.
I had a Rutland too; thouholp'st to kill him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too,and Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel ofthy womb
hath crept a hell-hound thatdoth hunt us all to death.
That dog that had histeeth before his eyes
to worry lambs and laptheir gentle blood,
that excellent grandtyrant of the earth
that reigns in galled eyesof weeping souls,
that foul defacer of God'shandiwork
thy womb let loose tochase us to our graves.
O upright, just, andtrue-disposing God,
how do I thank thee thatthis carnal cur
preys on the issue of hismother's body
and makes her pew fellowwith others' moan.
O Harry's wife, triumphnot in my woes.
God witness with me; Ihave wept for thine.
Bear with me.
I am hungry for revenge,
and now I cloy me withbeholding it.
Thy Edward, he is dead,that killed my Edward,
thy other Edward dead toquit my Edward.
Young York, he is butboot,
because both they matchnot the high perfection ofmy loss.
Thy Clarence, he is dead,that stabbed my Edward.
And to the beholders ofthat frantic play,
the adulterate Hastings,Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
untimely smothered intheir dusky graves.
Richard yet lives.
Hell's black intelligencer
only reserved their factor
to buy souls and send themthither.
But at hand,
at hand ensues his piteousand unpitied end.
Earth gapes, hell burns,fiends roar, saints pray
to have him suddenlyconveyed from hence.
Cancel his bond of life,dear God, I pray,
that I may live and saythe dog is dead!
O, thou didst prophesy thetime would come
that I should wish forthee to help me curse
that bottled spider, thatfoul, bunch-backed toad.
I called thee then vainflourish of my fortune.
I called thee then poorshadow, painted queen,
the presentation of butwhat I was,
the flattering index of adireful pageant,
one heaved ahigh to behurled down below,
a mother only mocked withtwo fair babes,
a dream of what thou wast,
a garish flag to be the aimof every dangerous shot,
a queen in jest, only tofill the scene.
Where is thy husband now?
Where be thy brothers?
Where are thy two sons?
Wherein dost thou joy?
Who sues and kneels andsays "God save the queen"?
Where be the bending peersthat flattered thee?
Where be the throngingtroops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and seewhat now thou art.
For happy wife, a mostdistressed widow.
For joyful mother, onethat wails the name.
For one being sued to, onethat humbly sues.
For queen, a very caitivecrowned with care.
For she that scorned at menow scorned of me.
For she being feared ofall now fearing one.
For she commanding all,obeyed of none.
Thus hath the course ofjustice whirled about
and left thee but a veryprey to time,
having no more but thoughtof what thou wast
to torture thee the more,being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place.
Dost thou not usurp the justproportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bearshalf my burdened yoke
from which even here Islip my wearied head
and leave the burden of itall on thee.
Farewell, York's wife
and queen of sadmischance.
O, these English woes shallmake me smile in France.
O, thou well-skilled incurses, stay awhile,
and teach me how to cursemine enemies.
Forbear to sleep thenights and fast the days.
Compare dead happinesswith living woe.
Think that thy babes weresweeter than they were
and he that slew themfouler than he is.
Bettering thy loss willmake the bad causer worse.
Revolving this will teachthee how to curse.
My words are dull!
O, quicken them withthine.
Thy woes will make themsharp and pierce like mine.
Why should calamity befull of words?
Windy attorneys to theirclients' woes,
poor breathing orators ofmiseries,
let them have scope.
Though what they willimpart help nothing else,
yet do they ease theheart.
If so, then be nottongue-tied.
Go with me,
and in the breath ofbitter words,
let's smother my damnedson
that thy two sweet sonssmothered.
The trumpet sounds.
Be copious in exclaims.
Who intercepts me in myexpedition?
O, she that might haveintercepted thee
by strangling thee in heraccursed womb
from all the slaughters,wretch, that thou hast done.
Tell me, thou villain slave,where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad,where is thy brotherClarence
and little NedPlantagenet, his son?
Where is the gentleRivers, Vaughan, Grey?
Where is kind Hastings?
A flourish, trumpets!
Strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hearthese tell-tale women
rail on the Lord'sanointed.
Strike, I say!
Either be patient andentreat me fair,
or with the clamorousreport of war,
thus will I drown yourexclamations.
Art thou my son?
Aye, I thank God, myfather, and yourself.
Then patiently hear myimpatience.
Madam, I have a touch ofyour condition
that cannot brook theaccent of reproof.
O, let me speak.
Do then, but I'll nothear.
I will be mild and gentlein my words.
And brief, good mother,for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty?
I have stayed for thee,God knows,
in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last tocomfort you?
No, by the holy rood, thouknow'st it well.
Thou camest on earth tomake the earth my Hell.
A grievous burden was thybirth to me.
Tetchy and wayward was thyinfancy,
thy schooldays frightful,desperate, wild, and furious,
thy prime of manhood daring,bold, and venturous,
thy age confirmed, proud,subtle, sly, and bloody,
more mild but yet moreharmful, kind in hatred.
If I be so disgracious inyour eye,
let me march on and notoffend you, madam.
Strike up the drum!
I prithee, hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.
Hear me a word,
for I shall never speak tothee again.
So.
Either thou wilt die byGod's just ordinance,
ere from this war thouturn a conqueror,
or I with grief andextreme age shall perish
and nevermore behold thyface again.
Therefore, take with theemy most grievous curse,
which in the day ofbattle, tire thee more
than all the completearmor that thou wearest.
My prayers on the adverseparty fight.
And there the little soulsof Edward's children
whisper the spirits ofthine enemies
and promise them successand victory.
Bloody thou art; bloodywill be thy end.
Shame serves thy life anddoth thy death attend.
Though far more cause,
yet much less spirit tocurse abides in me.
I say amen to her.
Stay, madam.
I must talk a word withyou.
I have no more sons of theroyal blood for thee toslaughter.
For my daughters, Richard,
they shall be prayingnuns, not weeping queens,
and therefore level not tohit their lives.
You have a daughter calledElizabeth,
virtuous and fair, royaland gracious.
And must she die for this?
O, let her live,
and I'll corrupt hermanners, stain her beauty,
slander myself as false toEdward's bed,
throw over her the veil ofinfamy.
So she may live unscarredof bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was notEdward's daughter.
Wrong not her birth; sheis a royal princess.
To save her life, I'll sayshe is not so.
Her life is safest only inher birth.
And only in that safetydied her brothers.
Lo, at their birth, goodstars were opposite.
No, to their lives illfriends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doomof destiny.
True, when avoided gracemakes destiny.
My babes were destined toa fairer death
if grace had blessed theewith a fairer life.
You speak as if that I hadslain my cousins.
Cousins, indeed, and bytheir uncle,
cozened of comfort, kingdom,kindred, freedom, life!
Whose hand soever lancedtheir tender hearts,
thy head, all indirectly,gave direction.
No doubt the murderousknife was dull and blunt
till it was whetted on thystone-hard heart
to revel in the entrailsof my lambs.
But that still use of griefmakes wild grief tame,
my tongue should to thineears not name my boys
till that my nails wereanchored in thine eyes.
And I, in such a desperatebay of death,
like a poor bark of sailsand tackling reft,
rush all to pieces on thyrocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in myenterprise
and dangerous success ofbloody wars
as I intend more good toyou and yours
than ever you or yours byme were harmed.
What good is covered withthe face of Heaven
to be discovered that cando me good?
The advancement of yourchildren, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, thereto lose their heads?
Unto the dignity andheight of fortune,
the high imperial type ofthis earth's glory.
Flatter my sorrow withreport of it.
Tell me, what state, whathonor, what dignity
canst thou demise to anychild of mine?
Even all I have.
Aye, and myself and all
will I withal endow achild of thine
so in the lethe of thyangry soul,
thou drown the sadremembrance of those wrongs
which thou supposest Ihave done to thee.
Be brief, lest that theprocess of thy kindness
last longer telling thanthy kindness' date.
Then know that from mysoul, I love thy daughter.
My daughter's motherthinks it with her soul.
What do you think?
That thou dost love mydaughter from thy soul.
So from thy soul's love didstthou love her brothers,
and from my heart's love,I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty toconfound my meaning.
I mean that with my soul,I love thy daughter
and do intend to make herqueen of England.
Well, then, who dost thoumean shall be her king?
Even he that makes herqueen; who else should be?
What, thou?
Even so. How think you ofit?
How canst thou woo her?
That would I learn of you,
as one being bestacquainted with her humor.
And wilt thou learn of me?
Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her by the manthat slew her brothers
a pair of bleeding hearts.
Thereon engrave Edward andYork.
Then haply will she weep.
Therefore present to her--
as sometimes Margaret didto thy father,
steeped in Rutland'sblood--
a handkerchief, which, sayto her,
did drain the purple sap fromher sweet brother's body,
and bid her wipe herweeping eyes withal.
If this inducement moveher not to love,
send her a letter of thynoble deed.
Tell her thou madest away
her uncle Clarence, heruncle Rivers,
aye, and, for her sake,
mad'st quick conveyancewith her good aunt Anne.
You mock me, madam?
This is not the way to winyour daughter.
There is no other way,
unless thou couldst put onsome other shape
and not be Richard thathath done all this.
Say that I did all thisfor love of her.
Nay, then indeed she cannotchoose but hate thee,
having bought love withsuch a bloody spoil!
Look, what is done cannotbe now amended!
Men shall deal unadvisedlysometimes,
which after hours, givesleisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdomfrom your sons,
to make amends, I'll giveit to your daughter.
If I have killed the issueof your womb,
to quicken your increase,
I will beget mine issue ofyour blood upon your daughter.
A grandam's name is littleless in love
than is the doting titleof a mother.
They are as children butone step below,
even of your mettle, ofyour very blood.
Of all one pain, save fora night of groans enduredof her,
for whom you bid likesorrow.
Your children werevexation to your youth,
but mine shall be acomfort to your age.
The loss you have is but ason being king,
and by that loss, yourdaughter is made queen.
I cannot make you whatamends I would.
Therefore, accept suchkindness as I can.
Dorset, your son, thatwith a fearful soul
leads discontented stepsin foreign soil,
this fair alliance quicklyshall call home
to high promotions andgreat dignity.
The king, that calls yourbeauteous daughter wife,
familiarly shall call thyDorset brother.
Again shall you be motherto a king
and all the ruins ofdistressful times repaired
with doubled riches ofcontent.
What?
We have many goodly daysto see.
The liquid drops of tearsthat you have shed
shall come again,transformed to Orient pearl,
advantaging their loanwith interest
of ten times double gainof happiness.
Go then, my mother.
To thy daughter go.
Make bold her bashful yearswith your experience.
Prepare her ears to hear awooer's tale
put in her tender heart
the aspiring flame ofgolden sovereignty.
Acquaint the princess
with the sweet silenthours of marriage joys,
and when this arm of mine hathchastised the petty rebel,
dull-brained Buckingham,
bound with triumphantgarlands will I come
and lead thy daughter to aconqueror's bed,
to whom I will retail myconquest won,
and she shall be solevictress, Caesar's Caesar.
What were I best to say?
Her father's brother wouldbe her lord?
Or shall I say her uncle?
Or he that slew herbrothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall Iwoo for thee
that God, the law, myhonor, and her love,
can make seem pleasing toher tender years?
Infer fair England's peaceby this alliance.
Which she shall purchasewith still-lasting war.
Tell her the king that maycommand entreats.
That at her hands whichthe king's king forbids.
Say she shall be a highand mighty queen.
To veil a title, as hermother doth.
Say I will love hereverlastingly.
But how long shall thattitle "ever" last?
Sweetly in force unto herfair life's end.
But how long fairly shallher sweet life last?
As long as heaven andnature lengthens it.
As long as Hell andRichard likes of it.
Say, I, her sovereign, amher subject love.
But she, your subject,loathes such sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalfto her.
An honest tale speeds bestbeing plainly told.
Then plainly to her, tellher my loving tale.
Plain and not honest istoo harsh a style.
Your reasons are tooshallow and too quick!
O no, my reasons are toodeep and dead.
Too deep and dead, poorinfants, in their grave.
Harp not on that string,madam.
That is past.
Harp on it still shall Itill heartstrings break.
Now, by my George, mygarter, and my crown--
Profaned, dishonored, andthe third, usurped.
I swear--
By nothing, for this is nooath.
Thy George, profaned, hathlost his holy honor.
Thy garter, blemished,pawned his knightly virtue.
Thy crown, usurped,disgraced his kingly glory.
If something thou wouldstswear to be believed,
swear then by somethingthat thou hast not wronged.
Now, by the world--
'Tis full of thy foulwrongs.
My father's death--
Thy life hath itdishonored.
Then by myself--
Thyself is self misused.
Why, then, by God.
God's wrong is most ofall!
If thou didst fear tobreak an oath with God,
the unity the king myhusband made,
thou hadst not broken normy brothers died.
If thou hadst feared tobreak an oath with Him,
the imperial metalcircling now thy head
had graced the tendertemples of my child,
and both the princes hadbeen breathing here,
which now, two tenderbedfellows for dust,
thy broken faith hath madethe prey for worms.
What canst thou swear bynow?
The time to come.
That thou hast wronged inthe time o'erpast.
For I myself have many tearsto wash hereafter time
for times past wronged bythee.
The children live whosefathers thou hast slaughtered,
ungoverned youth, to wailit in their age.
The parents live whosechildren thou hast butchered,
old barren plants, to wailit with their age.
Swear not by time to come,
for that thou hast misusedere used
by times ill usedo'erpast!
As I intend to prosper andrepent,
so thrive I in my dangerousaffairs of hostile arms.
Myself, myself confound.
God and fortune bar mehappy hours.
Day, yield me not thylight nor night, thy rest.
Be opposite, all planets ofgood luck, to my proceeding
if, with dear heart'slove, immaculate devotion,
holy thoughts, I tendernot your beauteous,princely daughter.
In her consists myhappiness and thine.
Without her, follows tomyself and thee,
herself, the land, andmany a Christian soul,
death, desolation, ruin,and decay.
It cannot be avoided butby this.
It will not be avoided butby this.
Therefore, dear mother-- Imust call you so--
be the attorney of my loveto her.
Plead what I will be, notwhat I have been.
Not my deserts, but what Iwill deserve.
Urge the necessity andstate of times,
and be not peevish foundin great designs.
Shall I be tempted of thedevil thus?
Aye, if the devil temptyou to do good.
Shall I forget myself tobe myself?
Aye, if yourself'sremembrance wrong yourself.
Yet thou didst kill mychildren.
But in your daughter'swomb, I bury them,
where, in that nest ofspicery,
they will breed selves ofthemselves,
to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughterto thy will?
And be a happy mother bythe deed.
I go.
Write to me very shortly,
and you shall understandfrom me her mind.
Bear her my true love'skiss.
And so, farewell.
Relenting fool andshallow, changing woman.
How now. What news?
Mighty sovereign, on thewestern coast
rideth a puissant navy.
To our shores throng manydoubtful hollow-heartedfriends,
unarmed and unresolved tobeat them back.
'Tis thought that Richmondis their admiral.
And there they hull,expecting but the aid ofBuckingham
to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend postto the duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliffe, thyself, orCatesby.
Where is he?
Here, my lord.
Catesby, fly to the duke.
I will, my lord, with allconvenient haste.
Ratcliffe, come hither.
Post to Salisbury.
When thou comest thither--
Dull, unmindful villain,
why stayest thou here andgoest not to the duke?
First, mighty liege, tellme your highness' pleasure,
what from your grace Ishall deliver to him.
O true, good Catesby.
Bid him levy straight
the greatest strength andpower that he can make
and meet me suddenly atSalisbury.
I go.
What may it please youshall I do at Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou dothere before I go?
Your highness told me Ishould post before.
My mind is changed.
Stanley, what news withyou?
None good, my liege, toplease you with the hearing,
nor none so bad but wellmay be reported.
Hoyday, a riddle.
Neither good nor bad.
What needest thou run somany miles about,
when thou mayest tell thytale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?
Richmond is on the seas.
There let him sink, and bethe seas on him.
White-livered runagate!
What doth he there?
I know not, mightysovereign, but by guess.
Well, as you guess.
Stirred up by Dorset,Buckingham, and Ely,
he makes for England, hereto claim the crown.
Is the chair empty?
Is the sword unswayed?
Is the king dead, theempire unpossessed?
What heir of York is therealive but we?
And who is England's kingbut great York's heir?
Then tell me, what makeshe upon the seas?
Unless for that, my liege,I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comesto be your liege,
you cannot guess whereforethe Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt and flyto him, I fear.
No, my good lord.
Therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power, then,to beat him back?
Where be thy tenants andthy followers?
Are they not now upon thewestern shore,
safe-conducting the rebelsfrom their ships?
No, my good lord.
My friends are in thenorth.
Cold friends to me!
What do they in the north,
when they should serve theirsovereign in the west?
They have not beencommanded, mighty king.
Pleaseth your majesty togive me leave,
I'll muster up my friendsand meet your grace
where and what time yourmajesty shall please.
Aye.
Aye, thou wouldst be goneto join with Richmond.
But I'll not trust thee.
Most mighty sovereign,
you have no cause to holdmy friendship doubtful.
I never was nor never willbe false.
Go then and muster men.
But leave behind your son,George Stanley.
Look your heart be firm,
or else his head'sassurance is but frail.
So deal with him as Iprove true to you.
My gracious sovereign...
now in Devonshire, as I byfriends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney andthe haughty prelate,
bishop of Exeter, hiselder brother,
with many moreconfederates, are in arms.
My liege, in Kent, theGuildfords are in arms.
And every hour, morecompetitors flock to therebels,
and their power growsstrong.
My lord, the army of greatBuckingham--
Out on you, owls!
Nothing but songs ofdeath?
There, take thou that tillthou bring better news.
The news I have to tellyour majesty
is that by sudden floodsand fall of waters,
Buckingham's army isdispersed and scattered
and he himself wandered awayalone, no man knows whither.
I cry thee mercy.
There is my purse to curethat blow of thine.
Hath any well-advisedfriend proclaimed reward
to him that brings thetraitor in?
Such proclamation hathbeen made, my lord.
Sir Thomas Lovel and LordMarquis Dorset,
'tis said, my liege, inYorkshire are in arms.
But this good comfortbring I to your highness:
the Breton navy isdispersed by tempest!
Richmond in Dorsetshire sentout a boat unto the shore
to ask those on the banks
if they were hisassistants, yea or no.
Who answered him, theycame from Buckingham,
upon his party.
He, mistrusting them,hoist sail
and made his course againfor Brittany.
March on, march on, sincewe are up in arms,
if not to fight withforeign enemies,
yet to beat down theserebels here at home.
My liege! The Duke ofBuckingham is taken!
That is the best news.
That the Earl of Richmond
is with a mighty powerlanded at Milford
is colder tidings, yetthey must be told.
Away toward Salisbury.
While we reason here,
a royal battle might bewon and lost.
Someone take order
that Buckingham be broughtto Salisbury.
The rest march on with me!
Sir Christopher, tellRichmond this from me:
that in the sty of themost deadly boar,
my son George Stanley isfranked up in hold.
If I revolt, off goesyoung George's head.
'Tis fear of that holdsoff my present aid.
So get thee gone.
Commend me to thy lord.
Withal, say that the queenhath heartily consented
he should espouseElizabeth, her daughter.
But tell me, where isprincely Richmond now?
At Pembroke or atHarford-west in Wales
with many other of greatname and worth,
and towards London do theybend their power
if by the way, they be notfought withal.
O, hie thee to thy lord.
I kiss his hand.
My letter will resolve himof my mind.
Farewell.
Will not King Richard letme speak with him?
No, my good lord.
Therefore, be patient.
Hastings and Edward'schildren,
Grey and Rivers, holy KingHenry,
and thy fair son Edward,Vaughan,
and all that hathmiscarried
by underhand, corruptedfoul injustice,
if that your moody,discontented souls
do through the cloudsbehold this present hour,
even for revenge, mock mydestruction.
This is All Souls' Day,fellow, is it not?
It is.
Why, then, All Souls' Dayis my body's doomsday.
This is the day which inKing Edward's time
I wished might fall on me
when I was found false tohis children and hiswife's allies.
This is the day wherein Iwished to fall
by the false faith of himwhom most I trusted.
This, this All Souls' Day
to my fearful soul is thedetermined respite of mywrongs.
That high All-Seer which Idallied with
hath turned my feignedprayer on my head
and given in earnest whatI begged in jest.
Thus doth he force theswords of wicked men
to turn their own pointsin their masters' bosoms.
Thus Margaret's cursefalls heavy on my neck.
"When he," quoth she,
"shall split thy heartwith sorrow,
remember Margaret was aprophetess."
Come, Ratcliffe.
Lead me to the block ofshame.
Wrong hath but wrong
and blame the due ofblame.
Fellows in arms and mymost loving friends,
bruised underneath theyoke of tyranny,
thus far into the bowelsof the land
have we marched on withoutimpediment.
And here receive we fromour father, Stanley,
lines of fair comfort andencouragement.
The wretched, bloody, andusurping boar
that spoiled your summerfields and fruitful vines,
swills your warm bloodlike wash
and makes his trough inyour emboweled bosoms--
this foul swine is now evenin the center of this isle
near to the town ofLeicester, as we learn.
From Tamworth thither isbut one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on,courageous friends,
to reap the harvest ofperpetual peace
by this one bloody trialof sharp war.
Every man's conscience isa thousand men
to fight against thisguilty homicide.
I doubt not but hisfriends will turn to us.
He hath no friends butwhat are friends for fear,
which in his dearest needwill fly from him.
All for our vantage.
Then in God's name, march.
True hope is swift andflies with swallow's wings.
Kings it makes gods andmeaner creatures kings.
Here pitch our tent, evenhere in Bosworth Field.
My Lord of Surrey, whylook you so sad?
My heart is ten timeslighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk.
Here, most gracious liege.
Norfolk, we must haveknocks. Huh, must we not?
We must both give andtake, my loving lord.
Up with my tent!
Here will I lie tonight.
But where tomorrow?
Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried thenumber of the traitors?
Six or seven thousand istheir utmost power.
Why, our battalion treblesthat account.
Besides, the king's nameis a tower of strength
which they upon theadverse faction want.
Up with the tent!
Come, noble gentlemen.
Let us survey the vantageof the ground.
Call for some men of sounddirection.
Let's lack no discipline,make no delay.
For, lords, tomorrow is abusy day.
The weary sun hath made agolden set,
and by the bright track ofhis fiery car
gives token of a goodlyday tomorrow.
Sir William Brandon, youshall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paperin my tent.
I'll draw the form andmodel of our battle.
Limit each leader to hisseveral charge,
and part in just proportionour small power.
My Lord of Dorset, you,Sir William Brandon,
and you, Sir WalterHerbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keepshis regiment.
Good Captain Blunt, bearmy good night to him,
and by the second hour inthe morning,
desire the earl to see mein my tent.
Yet one thing more, goodCaptain, do for me.
Where is Lord Stanleyquartered?
Do you know?
Unless I have mista'en hiscolors much,
which well I am assured Ihave not done,
his regiment lies half amile at least
south from the mightypower of the king.
If without peril it bepossible, sweet Blunt,
make some good means tospeak with him,
and give him from me thismost needful note.
Upon my life, my lord,I'll undertake it.
So God give you quiet resttonight.
Good night, good CaptainBlunt.
Come, gentlemen.
Let us consult upontomorrow's business.
Into my tent.
The dew is raw and cold.
What is't o'clock?
It's suppertime, my lord.
It's nine o'clock.
I will not sup tonight.
Give me some ink andpaper.
What, is my armor easierthan it was?
It is, my liege; and allthings are in readiness.
Good Norfolk.
Hie thee to thy charge.
Use careful watch. Choosetrusty sentinels.
I go, my lord.
Stir with the larktomorrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you, my lord.
Catesby.
My lord?
Send out a pursuivant atarms to Stanley's regiment.
Bid him bring his powerbefore sunrising,
lest his son George
fall into the blind caveof eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine.
Give me a watch!
Saddle white Surrey forthe field tomorrow.
Look that my staves besound and not too heavy.
Ratcliffe.
My lord.
Sawest thou the melancholyLord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earl of Surreyand himself,
much about cock-shut time,from troop to troop
went through the army,cheering up the soldiers.
So I am satisfied.
Give me a bowl of wine.
I have not that alacrityof spirit
nor cheer of mind that Iwas wont to have.
Set it down.
Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.
Bid my guard watch.
Leave me.
Ratcliffe.
About the mid of night,
come to my tent and helpto arm me.
Leave me, I say.
Fortune and victory sit onthy helm.
All comfort that the darknight can afford
be to thy person, noblefather-in-law.
Tell me, how fares ourloving mother?
I, by attorney, bless theefrom thy mother,
who prays continually forRichmond's good.
So much for that.
The silent hours steal on,
and flaky darkness breakswithin the east.
In brief, for so theseason bids us be,
prepare thy battle earlyin the morning,
and put thy fortune to thearbitraments
of bloody strokes andmortal-staring war.
I, as I may-- that which Iwould I cannot--
with best advantage willdeceive the time
and aid thee in thisdoubtful shock of arms.
But on thy side, I may notbe too forward
lest, being seen, thybrother, tender George,
be executed in hisfather's sight.
Farewell.
The leisure and thefearful time
cuts off the ceremoniousvows of love
which so long-sunderedfriends should dwell upon.
God give us leisure forthese rites of love.
Once more, adieu.
Be valiant, and speedwell.
Good lords, conduct him tohis regiment.
I'll strive with troubledthoughts to take a nap,
lest leaden slumber peiseme down tomorrow,
when I should mount withwings of victory.
Once more, good night,kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain Iaccount myself,
look on my forces with agracious eye.
Put in their hands thybruising irons of wrath,
that they may crush downwith a heavy fall
the usurping helmets ofour adversaries.
Make us thy ministers ofchastisement,
that we may praise thee inthe victory.
To thee I do commend mywatchful soul,
ere I let fall the windowsof mine eyes.
Sleeping and waking, O,defend me still.
My prayers on the adverseparty fight.
And there the little soulsof Edward's children
whisper the spirits ofthine enemies
and promise them successand victory.
Bloody thou art.
Bloody will be thy end.
Shame serves thy life anddoth thy death attend.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow.
Think how thou stabbest me
in my prime of youth atTewksbury.
Despair, therefore, anddie.
Be cheerful, Richmond,
for the wronged souls ofbutchered princes
fight in thy behalf.
King Henry's issue,Richmond, comforts thee.
When I was mortal, myanointed body
by thee was punched fullof deadly holes.
Think on the Tower and me.
Despair, and die.
Harry the Sixth bids theedespair, and die.
Virtuous and holy, be thouconqueror.
Harry, that prophesiedthou shouldst be king,
doth comfort thee in thysleep.
Live, and flourish.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow.
I, that was washed todeath with fulsome wine,
poor Clarence, by thyguile betrayed to death.
Tomorrow in the battle,think on me,
and fall thy edgelesssword.
Despair, and die.
Thou offspring of thehouse of Lancaster,
the wronged heirs of York,do pray for thee.
Good angels guard thybattle.
Live, and flourish.
Let me sit heavy on thysoul tomorrow:
Rivers, that died atPomfret.
Despair, and die.
Think upon Grey, and letthy soul despair.
Think upon Vaughan,
and with guilty fear, letfall thy lance.
Despair, and die.
Awake, and think ourwrongs
in Richard's bosom willconquer him.
Awake, and win the day.
Bloody and guilty,guiltily awake,
and in a bloody battle,end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings.
Despair, and die.
Quiet, untroubled soul,awake, awake.
Arm, fight, and conquer,for fair England's sake.
Dream on thy cousins,smothered in the Tower.
Let us be led within thybosom, Richard,
and weigh thee down toruin, shame, and death.
Thy nephews' souls bidthee despair and die.
Sleep, Richmond.
Sleep in peace, and wakein joy.
Good angels guard theefrom the boar's annoy.
Live, and beget a happyrace of kings.
Edward's unhappy sons dobid thee flourish.
Richard, thy wife,
that wretched Anne, thywife,
that never slept a quiethour with thee,
now fills thy sleep withperturbations.
Tomorrow in the battle,think on me,
and fall thy edgelesssword.
Despair, and die.
Thou quiet soul, sleepthou a quiet sleep.
Dream of success and happyvictory.
Thy adversary's wife dothpray for thee.
The first was I thathelped thee to the crown.
The last was I that feltthy tyranny.
O, in the battle, think ofBuckingham.
Die in terror of thyguiltiness.
Dream on.
Dream on of bloody deedsand death.
Fainting, despair.
Despairing, yield thybreath.
I died for hope ere Icould lend thee aid.
But cheer thy heart, andbe thou not dismayed.
God and good angels fighton Richmond's side.
And Richard fall, inheight of all his pride.
Give me another horse!
Bind up my wounds!
Have mercy, Jesu.
Soft, I did but dream.
Coward conscience, howdost thou afflict me.
The lights burn blue.
'Tis now dead midnight.
Cold, fearful drops standon my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?
Myself?
There's none else by.
Richard loves Richard.
That is I and I.
Is there a murderer here?
No. Yes, I am.
Then fly.
What, from myself?
Great reason why, lest Irevenge.
What, myself upon myself?
Alack, I love myself.
Wherefore?
For any good that I myselfhave done unto myself?
O, no! Alas, I rather hatemyself
for hateful deedscommitted by myself.
I am a villain.
Yet I lie. I am not.
Fool, of thyself speakwell.
Fool, do not flatter!
My conscience hath athousand several tongues,
and every tongue brings ina several tale,
and every tale condemns mefor a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in thehighest degree.
Murder, stern murder, inthe direst degree.
All several sins, all usedin each degree,
throng to the bar, cryingall, "Guilty, guilty."
I shall despair.
There is no creature lovesme.
And if I die, no soul willpity me.
And wherefore should they,
since that I myself find inmyself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of allthat I'd murdered came tomy tent,
and every one did threattomorrow's vengeance
on the head of Richard.
My lord?
'Zounds. Who is there?
Ratcliffe, my lord.
'Tis I.
The early village cock
hath twice done salutationto the morn.
Your friends are up andbuckle on their armor.
O Ratcliffe, I havedreamed a fearful dream.
What thinkest thou?
Will our friends prove alltrue?
No doubt, my lord.
O Ratcliffe, I fear.
I fear.
Nay, good my lord.
Be not afraid of shadows.
By the apostle Paul,shadows tonight
have struck more terror tothe soul of Richard
than can the substance ofa thousand soldiers
armed in proof and led byshallow Richmond.
'Tis not yet near day.
Come, go with me.
Under our tents, I'll playthe eavesdropper,
to see if any mean toshrink from me.
Good morrow, my lord.
Oh.
Cry mercy, lords andwatchful gentlemen,
that you have ta'en atardy sluggard here.
How have you slept, mylord?
The sweetest sleep andfairest-boding dreams
that ever entered in adrowsy head
have I since yourdeparture had, my lords.
Methought their soulswhose bodies Richardmurdered
came to my tent and criedon victory.
I promise you, my soul isvery jocund
in the remembrance of sofair a dream.
How far into the morningis it, lords?
Upon the stroke of four.
Why, then, 'tis time toarm and give direction.
More than I have said,loving countrymen,
the leisure andenforcement of the timeforbids to dwell upon.
Yet remember this:
God and our good causefight upon our side.
The prayers of holy saintsand wronged souls,
like high-reared bulwarks,stand before our faces,
Richard except.
Those whom we fightagainst
had rather have us winthan him they follow.
For what is he theyfollow?
Truly, gentlemen, a bloodytyrant and a homicide,
one raised in blood andone in blood established,
one that made means tocome by what he hath
and slaughtered those thatwere the means to help him.
A base, foul stone,
made precious by the foilof England's chair,
where he is falsely set.
One that hath ever beenGod's enemy.
Then, if you fight againstGod's enemy,
God will in justice wardyou as his soldiers.
If you do sweat to put atyrant down,
you sleep in peace, thetyrant being slain.
If you do fight againstyour country's foes,
your country's fat shallpay your pains the hire.
If you do fight insafeguard of your wives,
your wives shall welcomehome the conquerors.
If you do free yourchildren from the sword,
your children's childrenquits it in your age.
Then, in the name of Godand all these rights,
advance your standards;draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of mybold attempt
shall be this cold corpseon the earth's cold face.
But if I thrive, the gainof my attempt
the least of you shallshare his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpetsboldly and cheerfully.
God and Saint George.
Richmond and victory!
And what saidNorthumberland as touchingRichmond?
That he was never trainedup in arms.
He said the truth.
And what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said, "Thebetter for our purpose."
He was in the right.
And so indeed it is.
Ten the clock there.
Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun today?
Not I, my lord.
Then he disdains to shine,
for by the book, he shouldhave braved the east anhour ago.
A black day will it be tosomebody.
Ratcliffe.
My lord?
The sun will not be seentoday.
The sky doth frown andlour upon our army.
I would these dewy tearswere from the ground.
Not shine today.
Why, what is that to memore than to Richmond?
For the selfsame Heaventhat frowns on me
looks sadly upon him.
Arm! Arm, my lord!
The foe vaunts in thefield.
Come! Bustle, bustle.
Caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley; bidhim bring his power.
I will lead forth mysoldiers to the plain,
and thus my battle shallbe ordered:
My forward shall be drawnout all at length,
consisting equally ofhorse and foot.
Our archers shall beplaced in the midst.
John, Duke of Norfolk,Thomas, Earl of Surrey
shall have the leading ofthis foot and horse.
They thus directed, we willfollow in the main battle,
whose puissance on eitherside
shall be well winged withour chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George toboot.
What think'st thou,Norfolk?
A good direction, warlikesovereign.
This I found on my tentthis morning.
"Jockey of Norfolk, be notso bold,
for Dickon, thy master, isbought and sold."
A thing devised by theenemy.
Go, gentleman, every manunto his charge.
Let not our babblingdreams affright our souls.
Conscience is but a wordthat cowards use,
devised at first to keepthe strong in awe.
Our strong arms be ourconscience, swords our law.
March on; join bravely.
Let us to it pell-mell,
if not to heaven, thenhand in hand to Hell.
What shall I say more thanI have inferred?
Remember whom you are tocope withal:
a sort of vagabonds,rascals, and runaways,
a scum of Bretons and baselackey peasants,
whom their o'ercloyedcountry vomits forth
to desperate adventuresand assured destruction.
You sleeping safe, theybring to you unrest.
You having lands and blestwith beauteous wives,
they would restrain theone, disdain the other.
And who doth lead them buta paltry fellow,
a milksop, one that neverin his life
felt so much cold asovershoes in snow?
Let's whip these stragglerso'er the seas again.
Lash hence theseoverweening rags of France,
these famished beggars,weary of their lives,
who, but for dreaming onthis fond exploit,
for want of means, poorrats, had hanged themselves.
If we be conquered, letmen conquer us,
and not these bastardBretons,
whom our fathers have intheir own lands
beaten, bobbed, andthumped,
and in record, left themthe heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy ourlands?
Lie with our wives?
Ravish our daughters?
No!
Hark. I hear their drum.
Fight, gentlemen ofEngland.
Fight, bold yeomen.
Draw, archers, draw yourarrows to the head.
Spur your proud horseshard, and ride in blood.
Amaze the welkin with yourbroken staves.
What says Lord Stanley?Will he bring his power?
My lord, he doth deny tocome.
Off with his son George'shead!
My lord, the enemy is pastthe marsh!
After the battle, letGeorge Stanley die.
A thousand hearts aregreat within my bosom.
Advance our standards.
Set upon our foes.
Our ancient word ofcourage, fair Saint George,
inspire us with the spleenof fiery dragons.
Upon them!
Victory sits on our helms!
Rescue.
My Lord of Norfolk,rescue, rescue!
The king enacts morewonders than a man,
daring an opposite toevery danger.
His horse is slain, andall on foot he fights,
seeking for Richmond inthe throat of death!
Rescue, fair lord, or elsethe day is lost!
A horse! A horse! Mykingdom for a horse!
Withdraw, my lord.
I'll help you to a horse.
Slave!
I'll set my life upon acast,
and I will stand thehazard of the die.
I think there be sixRichmonds in the field.
Five have I slain todayinstead of him.
A horse! A horse!
My kingdom for a horse!
Richard!
For Richmond!
Richmond!
God and your arms bepraised, victorious friends.
The day is ours.
The bloody dog is dead.
Courageous Richmond, wellhast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here, thislong-usurped royalty.
Wear it, enjoy it, andmake much of it.
Great God of Heaven, sayAmen to all.
But, tell me, is youngGeorge Stanley living?
He is, my lord, and safein Leicester town,
whither, if it please you,we will now withdraw us.
Proclaim a pardon to thesoldiers fled
that in submission willreturn to us.
And then, as we have ta'enthe sacrament,
we will unite the whiterose and the red.
Smile, Heaven, upon thisfair conjunction
that long have frownedupon their enmity.
What traitor hears me andsays not Amen?
Amen.
England hath long been madand scarred herself.
The brother blindly shedthe brother's blood,
the father rashlyslaughtered his own son,
the son, compelled, beenbutcher to the sire.
All this divided York andLancaster,
delighted in their diredivision.
O, now let Richmond andElizabeth,
the true succeeders ofeach royal house,
by God's fair ordinanceconjoin together.
And let their heirs, God,if thy will be so,
enrich the time to comewith smooth-faced peace,
with smiling plenty, andfair prosperous days.
Abate the edge oftraitors, gracious Lord,
that would reduce thesebloody days again
and make poor England weepin streams of blood.
Let them not live to tastethis land's increase
that would with treason woundthis fair land's peace.
Now civil wounds arestopped.
Peace lives again.
That she may long livehere, God say amen!